Θ́́EΟΛΟΓΙKΟΣ TPITOS.ΠΕΡΙ ΥΙΟΥ.Ἃ μὲν οὖν εἴποι τις ἂν ἐπικόπτων τὴν περὶ τὸνλόγον αὐτῶν ἑτοιμότητα καὶ ταχύτητα, καὶ τὸ τοῦ τάχουςἐπισφαλὲς ἐν πᾶσι μὲν πράγμασι, μάλιστα δὲ ἐν τοῖςπερὶ θεοῦ λόγοις, ταῦτά ἐστιν. ἐπεὶ δὲ τὸ μὲν ἐπιτιμᾷνοὐ μέγα· ῥᾷστον γὰρ καὶ τοῦ βουλομένου παντός· τὸ δὲἀντεισάγειν τὴν ἑαυτοῦ γνώμην ἀνδρὸς εὐσεβοῦς καὶ νοῦνἔχοντος· φέρε, τῷ ἁγίῳ θαρρήσαντες πνεύματι, τῷ παρ’αὐτῶν μὲν ἀτιμαζομένῳ, παρ’ ἡμῶν δὲ προσκυνουμένῳ, τὰςἡμετέρας περὶ τῆς θεότητος ὑπολήψεις, αἵ τινές ποτέ εἰσιν,ὥσπερ τινὰ τόκον εὐγενῆ τε καὶ ὥριμον εἰς φῶς προενέγκωμεν·οὐδὲ ἄλλοτε μὲν σιωπήσαντες, τοῦτο γὰρ μόνονἡμεῖς νεανικοί τε καὶ μεγαλόφρονες, νῦν δὲ καὶ μᾶλλον1. Ι ἐπικόπτων] ἐπισκώπτων b ΙΙ ’τον λόγον] τῶν λόγων b II 3 ἐν τοῖς]om ἐν c ΙΙ 7 πνεύματι θαρρήσαντες cde || 8 ἤμων] ἥμιν b ΙΙ 10 προσενεγκωμενf1. We have stated our objectionsto the hasty theology of the Euuomians;but it is a harder task to setforth our own. I will endeavour todo so with the aid of the Holy Spirit,— as indeed I have done before, but itis more necessary now than ever, —as briefly ἃς I can.1. ἐπικόπτων] ’by way of check-’ Αὐτῶν, the Eunomians.2. τὸ...ἐπισφαλές] ’the danger.’4. τὸ μὲν ἐπισφαλές] κτλ.] takenfrom Demosth. Olynth. i 7.6. ἀντεισάγειν] not merely ‘tostate in opposition,’ but to ‘instate,’to ‘substitute.’8. προσκυνουμένῳ] This does notcompel us to suppose that Gr. usedor was acquainted with the last partof our present ‘ Nicene ’ Creed. Seethe quotations in Hort Two Diss,p. 88.11. τοῦτο γὰρ μόνον] The verbomitted would prob. have to be expressedby perf. and pres. together;’have been and are.’ Gr. refers toformer outspoken sermons of hissuch as Orat. XX. For νέαν. cp. i 2.παρρησιαζόμενοι τὴν ἀλήθειαν· ἵνα μὴ τῇ ὑποστολῇ,καθὼς γέγραπται, τὸ μὴ εὐδοκεῖσθαι κατακριθῶμεν. διττοῦδὲ ὄντος λόγου παντός, τοῦ μὲν τὸ οἰκεῖον κατασκευάζοντος,τοῦ δὲ τὸ ἀντίπαλον ἀνατρέποντος, καὶ ἡμεῖς τὸν οἰκεῖονἐκθέμενοι πρότερον, οὕτω τὰ τῶν ἐναντίων ἀνατρέψαιπειρασόμεθα· καὶ ἀμφότερα ὡς οἷόν τε διὰ βραχέων, ἵνεὐσύνοπτα γένηται τὰ λεγόμενα, ὥσπερ ὃν αὐτοὶ λόγονεἰσαγωγικὸν ἐπενόησαν πρὸς ἐξαπάτην τῶν ἁπλουστέρωνἢ εὐηθεστέρων, καὶ μὴ τῷ μήκει τοῦ λόγου διαχεθῇ τὰνοούμενα, καθάπερ ὕδωρ οὐ σωλῆνι σφιγγόμενον, ἀλλὰκατὰ πεδίου χεόμενον καὶ λυόμενον.τρεῖς αἱ ἀνωτάτω δόξαι περὶ θεοῦ, ἀναρχία, καὶπολυαρχία, καὶ μοναρχία. αἱ μὲν οὖν δύο παισὶν ‘Ελλήνωνἐπαίχθησαν, καὶ παιζέσθωσαν. τό τε γὰρ ἄναρχονἄτακτον· τό τε πολύαρχον στασιῶδες, καὶ οὕτως ἄναρχον,καὶ οὕτως ἄτακτον. εἰς ταὐτὸν γὰρ ἀμφότερα φέρει, τὴνἀταξίαν, ἡ δὲ εἰς λύσιν· ἀταξία γὰρ μελέτη λύσεως.2 εὐδοκιμεῖσθαι b || 6 om ὡς f || 7 γενηται] γένωνται b ‘Reg. Cypr.’ ||9 διαχυθῇ bd ’Reg. Cypr.’ || IO νοούμενα] λεγόμενα ’Reg. Cypr.’1. τῆ ὑποστολῇ] Heb. x 38, 39(Hab. ii 4). The word, as the contexthere shews, implies a disingenuousreticence; cp. Gal. ii 12,13.2. διττοῦ δὲ ὄντος] The Bene-dictine editors compare Athenagorasde Resurr. 1.7. αὐτοί] the Eunomians. Gr.incidentally shews how systematicallythey went to work.10. σωλῆνισφιγγ.] ’compressed inα pipe.’11. χεόμ. κ. λυόμ.] Cp. ii 13.2. Atheism, Polytheism, Monotheism,are the three ancient opinionsabout God. The second ends in thesame anarchy as the first, and weleave it to the Gentiles. Our Monotheism,however, is one where ThreePersons are joined in equality ofnature and in identity of will, — twoof the three being derived from thefirst by what Scripture describes asgeneration and emission respectively.12. αἱ ἀνωτάτω δόξαι] ’the mostancient opinions.’13. παισὶν Ἑλλήνων] a phraseformed on the fashion of υἱοὶ Ἰσραήλ;but the word παῖδες seems to bechosen with a view to the verbἐπαίχθησαν. ‘With the first twothe children of Greece amused themselves.’14. τό τε γάρ] The γάρ givesthe reason why Gr. leaves thosetheories to the children of Greece(imperative).17. ἀταξία γὰρ μ. λ.] ’Disorderis the prelude to ’Forμελέτη (lit. ’practice,’ ’rehearsal’)cp. i 7.ἡμῖν δὲ μοναρχία τὸ τιμώμενον· μοναρχία δέ, οὐχ ἢν ἓνπεριγράφει πρόσωπον· ἔστι γὰρ καὶ τὸ ἓν στασιάζονπρὸς ἑαυτὸ πολλὰ καθίστασθαι· ἀλλ’ ἢν φύσεως ὁμοτιμίασυνίστησι, καὶ γνώμης σύμπνοια, καὶ ταὐτότης κινήσεως,καὶ πρὸς τὸ ἓν τῶν ἐξ αὐτοῦ σύννευσις, ὅπερ ἀμήχανονἐπὶ τῆς γενητῆς φύσεως, ὥστε κἂν ἀριθμῷ διαφέρῃ, τῇ γεοὐσίᾳ μὴ τέμνεσθαι. διὰ τοῦτο μονὰς ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς, εἰς δυάδακινηθεῖσα, μέχρι τριάδος ἔστη. καὶ τοῦτό ἐστιν ἡμῖν ὁπατήρ, καὶ ὁ υἱός, καὶ τὸ ἅγιον πνεῦμα· ὁ μὲν γεννήτωρκαὶ προβολεύς, λέγω δὲ ἀπαθῶς, καὶ ἀχρόνως, καὶ ἀσω-μάτως· τῶν δέ, τὸ μὲν γέννημα, τὸ δὲ πρόβλημα, ἢ οὐκοἱδ’ ὅπως ἄν τις ταῦτα καλέσειεν, ἀφελὼν πάντῃ τῶν2. 6 γενητης] γεννήτης def || τῆ γε οὐσία] τῆ ἐξουσία ac (sed τῆ γεοὐσία in marg.) g: τῆ γε οὐσία e in rasura1. μ. δέ, οὐχ ἢν ἐν] ‘Not a souereigntycontained in a single person.’2. ἐστι γάρ] Such a sovereignty,of a single person, does not necessarilyexclude the thought of discordand confusion. It is possible toconceive of a single entity beingdivided against itself, and so becomingmany. The divine unity,which we believe, is the result of‘equality of nature, unanimity ofjudgment, and identity of action’‘of will.’5. πρὸς τὸ ἐν κτλ.] This completeharmony of mind and will inthe Godhead is itself based uponthe concurrence of the other BlessedPersons with that One of Theirnumber from whom They are derived,viz. the Father. Gr. does not asyet name the Father, nor indeedany of the Persons, because he isspeaking in the abstract of thedivine unity and its conditions, andso says τὸ ἐν and not rbv ἔνα. Αcomparison of v 14 shews that τῶνἐξ αὐτοῦ depends on σύννευσις, noton τὸ ἐν. The ‘antecedent’ of ἐξαὐτοῦ (neut.) is τὸ ἐν.ib. ὅπερ] refers to the whole fourfolddescription. It is perhaps notimpossible that such an unity shouldexist among creaturely beings, butour experience suggests no instanceof it, — only imperfect images of it.The clause is of course parenthetical.6. ὥστε] again refers to thewhole description. It will be seenthat οὐσία to Gr. means more thanφύσις. There is a moral element init, and not only a metaphysical;ὁμοτιμία φύσεως is one of the thingswhich secure οὖσ’. μὴ τ. The readingτῆ ἐξουσίᾳ gives no satisfactory sense.7. μονὰς ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς] The languagecomes perilously near theSabellian conception of πλατυσμός(see Dorner Person of Christ div. I,vol. 2, p. 156); but of course Gr.'stenses κινηθεῖσα, ἔστη) are not tobe understood in a temporal sense.There was no time before the κίνησιςof which he speaks. For μάρι seeii 9.9. γενν. κ. προβ.] the γεννήτωρ,of course, of the Son; προβολεύς, ofthe Spirit.12. ἀφελών κτλ.] Gr. knows noother way of expressing the relationof the Son and Spirit to the Father,such as might get rid of material suggestions.ὁρωμένων. οὐ γὰρ δὴ ὑπέρχυσιν ἀγαθότητος εἰπεῖν θαρρήσομεν,ὃ τῶν παρ’ Ἕλλησι φιλοσοφησάντων εἰπεῖν τιςἐτόλμησεν, οἷον κρατήρ τις ὑπερερρύῃ, σαφῶς οὑτωσὶλέγων, ἐν οἷς περὶ πρώτου αἰτίου καὶ δευτέρου φιλοσοφεῖ·μή ποτε ἀκούσιον τὴν γέννησιν εἰσαγάγωμεν, καὶ οἷονπερίττωμά τι φυσικὸν καὶ δυσκάθεκτον, ἥκιστα ταῖς περὶθεότητος ὑπονοίαις πρέπον. διὰ τοῦτο ἐπὶ τῶν ἡμετέρωνὅρων ἱστάμενοι τὸ ἀγέννητον εἰσάγομεν, καὶ τὸ γεννητόν,καὶ τὸ ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐκπορευόμενον, ὥς πού φησιν αὐτὸςὁ θεὸς καὶ λόγος.Πότε οὖν ταῦτα; ὑπὲρ τὸ πότε ταῦτα. εἰ δὲ δεῖτι καὶ νεανικῶς εἰπεῖν, ὅτε ὁ πατήρ. πότε δὲ ὁ πατήρ;οὐκ ἢν ὅτε οὐκ ἦν. τοῦτο οὖν καὶ ὁ υἱός, καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸἅγιον. πάλιν ἐρώτα με, καὶ πάλιν ἀποκρινοῦμαί σοι.πότε ὁ υἱὸς γεγέννηται; ὅτε ὁ πατὴρ οὐ γεγέννηται. πότεδὲ τὸ πνεῦμα ἐκπεπόρευται; ὅτε ὁ υἱὸς οὐκ ἐκπεπόρευται,ἀλλὰ γεγέννηται ἀχρόνως καὶ ὑπὲρ λόγον· εἰ καὶ μὴδυνάμεθα τὸ ὑπὲρ χρόνον παραστῆσαι, θέλοντες χρονικὴνἐκφυγεῖν ἔμφασιν· τὸ γὰρ ὅτε, καὶ πρὸ τοῦδε, καὶ μετὰ1 θαρρήσωμεν ab II 3 ὑπερερρύη] ὑπερρύη dfg || 4 πέρι] + τῆς f || IO omκαὶ f 3. 13 πνεῦμα] + τὸ ἄγιον c ’Colb. I’ || 17 ει] + μὴ ’Coisl. 3’3. οἷον κρατήρ τις] The simileis used by Plato Tim. 41 D; but,as Jahn points out in his annotationsElias, in a different connexion.Gr. prob. refers to some Neoplatonicauthor.7. ἐπὶ τῶν ἠμ’. ὄρων] keeping toconsecrated by Christianusage; cp. i 5.9. ὥς πού φησιν] John xv 26.3. The acts thus described areabove and before time, although it isimpossible to divest ourselves of ternporalnotions in attenmpting to illustratethem. The Second and ThirdPersons are not posterior to the Firstpoint of time, though Their beingsprings out of His.11. ταῦτα] sc. τὸ γεννητόν and τὸἐκπορευόμενον. This is shewn byὅτε ὁ πατήρ in the next line,ib. ὑπὲρ τὸ πότε] above and beyond a ’when.’13. οὐκ ἢν ὅτε οὐκ ἢν] He replieswith the phrase so well known atthe beginning of the Arian controlanguageversy.ib. τοῦτο] sc. what is implied inοὐκ ἢν ὁτε οὐκ ἢν, eternal.19. ἔμφασιν] ’an image.’ Inorder to convey any notion of whatis above time, it is impossible toavoid the employment of temporalimagery. Ἔμφασις is, however, usedin rhetoric for an innuendo, a sugingestion of something beyond whatthe words express; and this may beGr.'s meaning here.ταῦτα, καὶ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς, οὐκ ἄχρονα, κἂν ὅτι μάλιστα βιαζώμεθα·πλὴν εἰ τὸ παρεκτεινόμενον τοῖς ἀιδίοις διάστηματὸν αἰῶνα λαμβάνοιμεν, τὸ μὴ κινήσει τινὶ μηδὲ ἡλίουφορᾷ μεριζόμενον καὶ μετρούμενον, ὅπερ ὁ χρόνος. πῶςοὖν οὐ συνάναρχα, εἰ συναίδια; ὅτι ἐκεῖθεν, εἰ καὶ μὴ μετ’ἐκεῖνο. τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἄναρχον, καὶ ἀίδιον· τὸ ἀίδιον δέ, οὐπάντως ἄναρχον, ἕως ἂν εἰς ἀρχὴν ἀναφέρηται τὸν πατέρα.οὐκ ἄναρχα οὖν τῷ αἰτίῳ· δῆλον δὲ τὸ αἴτιον ὡς οὐπάντως πρεσβύτερον τῶν ὧν αἴτιον· οὐδὲ γὰρ τοῦφωτὸς ἥλιος. καὶ ἄναρχά πὼς τῷ χρόνῳ, κἂν σὺ μορ-μολύττῃ τοὺς ἁπλουστέρους· οὐ γὰρ ὑπὸ χρόνον τὰ ἐξὧν ὁ χρόνος.Ἠὼς οὖν οὐκ ἐμπαθὴς ἡ γέννησις; ὅτι ἀσώματος.εἰ γὰρ ἡ ἐνσώματος ἐμπαθής, ἀπαθὴς ἡ ἀσώματος. ἐγὼ δέσε ἀντερήσομαι· πῶς θεός, εἰ κτίσμα; οὐ γὰρ θεὸς τὸ κτιζό-μένον· ἵνα μὴ λέγω, ὅτι κἀνταῦθα πάθος, ἂν σωματικῶς2 συμπαρεκτεινόμενον c ‘Reg. Cypr.’ || 3 λαμβάνομεν b II 6 ἐκεῖνον defτὸ ’δε ἀίδιον def || 9 ὢν] + ἐστιν bdf2. πλὴν εἰ κτλ.) The onlyway, Gr. says, is to adopt thestandard of Eternity. Eternity doesindeed suggest a kind of temporalduration; that cannot be helped;but we use it to denote ’an intervalor ’ commensurate withthings of a supra-temporal order,not measured by any measurementknown to time. It seems best toconnect the πλὴν with εἰ καἰ μὴ δυνάμεθα,and to treat the interveningsentence (in accordance with Gr.smanner) as parenthetical.5. ἐκεῖθεν] sc. ἐκ τοῦ πατρός.9. τοῦ φωτὸς ἤλως] The simileis, of course, unscientific; but itserves its purpose.10. ἄναρχά πὼς τῷ χρ.] In asense, so far as time is concerned,that which is Begotten and thatwhich Proceeds are without a beginning,as no date can be assigned,prior to which They had not begun.ib. μορμολύττῃ] ‘to scare’ withμορμώ, or bugbear.4. If difficulty is felt about the‘generation’ of the Son by the Father,the difficulty is not got rid rid bymaking the Son a ‘creature’ instead.It only arises from a carnal notionof what is meant by generation, asif there could be no higher hind ofgeneration.15. πῶς θεός] which the Eunomiansacknowledged, though withan interpretation of their own.16. κἀνταῦθα] i.e. ἐν τῷ κτίζειν.Α work of creation (lit. ‘founding’)as known to man involves time inwhich to work it out, desire for theaccomplishment, the formation ofa mental ideal, thought as to themode of execution, etc. Gr.'s objeelis to shew that the thought of creationon ’s part involves as manydifficulties as that of generation.λαμβάνηται, οἷον χρόνος, ἔφεσις, ἀνατύπωσις, φροντίς,ἐλπίς, λύπη, κίνδυνος, ἀποτυχία, διόρθωσις· ἃ πάντα καὶπλείω τούτων περὶ τὴν κτίσιν, ὡς πᾶσιν εὔδηλον. θαυμάζωδέ, ὅτι μὴ καὶ τοῦτο τολμᾷς, συνδυασμούς τινας ἐννοεῖν,καὶ χρόνους κυήσεως, καὶ κινδύνους ἀμβλώσεως, ὡς οὐδὲγεννᾷν ἐγχωροῦν, εἰ μὴ οὕτω γεγέννηκεν· ἢ πάλιν πτηνῶντινὰς καὶ χερσαίων καὶ ἐνύδρων γεννήσεις ἀπαριθμούμενος,τούτων τινὶ τῶν γεννήσεων ὑπάγειν τὴν θείαν καὶ ἀνεκλά-λῆτον, ἢ καὶ τὸν υἱὸν ἀναιρεῖν ἐκ τῆς καινῆς ὑποθέσεως.καὶ οὐδ’ ἐκεῖνο δύνασαι συνιδεῖν, ὅτι ᾧ διάφορος ἡ κατὰσάρκα γέννησις, — ποῦ γὰρ ἐν τοῖς σοῖς ἔγνως θεοτόκονπαρθένον; — τούτῳ καὶ ἡ πνευματικὴ γέννησις ἐξαλλάττουσα·μᾶλλον δέ, ᾧ τὸ εἶναι μὴ ταὐτόν, τούτῳ καὶ τὸγεννᾷν διάφορον.τίς οὖν ἐστὶ πατὴρ οὐκ ἠργμένος; ὅς τις οὐδὲ τοῦεἶναι ἤρξατο· ᾧ δὲ τὸ εἶναι ἤρξατο, τούτῳ καὶ τὸ εἶναιπατρί. οὔκουν πατὴρ ὕστερον, οὐ γὰρ ἤρξατο· καὶ πατὴρκυρίως, ὅτι μὴ καὶ υἱός· ὥσπερ καὶ υἱὸς κυρίως, ὅτι μὴ καὶπατήρ. τὰ γὰρ ἡμέτερα οὐ κυρίως, ὅτι καὶ ἄμφω· οὐ γὰρ4. 1 ἔφεσις χρόνος ac li 4 ἐννοεῖν] ἐπινοεῖν b ‘Reg. ’ 5 κυησεως]κινήσεως d ΙΙ 8 τούτων] + δὴ ’Or. I’ || 9 ἐναίρειν ‘Reg. Cypr.’ ||καινῆς] κενῆς be ’Reg. Cypr.’: + σου beg 15 του] rob: του f inrasura || 17 πατρὶ] πατὴρ b ’Reg. a1’4. συνδυασμούς] ‘copulation.’5. ἀμβλώσεως] ‘miscarriage.’6. οὕτω] by such ways as συνδυασμόςand so on.9. ἢ καί] ‘or else, ’ if the generationof the Son does not fit in withyour select example, ‘get rid of Himaltogether as a result of your novelscheme.’12. ἢ πνεῦμ’. γέννησις] i.e. Hisgeneration ace. to His divine nature.Ἐξαλλάττειν is freq. used intrans.5. The Father never ωας anythingelse but Father. While wehuman beings are sons, as well asfathers, He is absolutely Father,and that alone. If we say that He’has begotten’ a Son, we domean to imply a moment or date.Scripture often uses tenses in a waywhich differs from that of ordinarylife.15. τίς οὖν] It is the ’squestion: ‘What father is there whonever began to be a father ?’17. οὔκουν π. ὕστ.] ‘He didbecome Father at some subsequentpoint, because (ace. to the foregoingargument) He never began to be.’18. κυρίως] ‘properly, because Heis not at the same time Son.’on the other hand, Gr. goes on tosay, are not ‘properly ’ fathers, becausewe are ἄμφω, sons as muchas fathers. The variety of our relationshipsmakes it impossible toconsider any one of them an exhaustivedescription of a humanbeing; but fatherhood expresses allthat the person of God the Fatheris.τόδε μᾶλλον ἢ τόδε· καὶ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν ἡμεῖς, οὐχ ἑνός, ὥστεμερίζεσθαι, καὶ κατ’ ὀλίγον ἄνθρωποι, καὶ ἴσως οὐδὲἄνθρωποι, καὶ οἷοι μὴ τεθελήμεθα, καὶ ἀφιέντες καὶ ἀφιέμενοι,ὡς μόνας τὰς σχέσεις λείπεσθαι ὀρφανὰς τῶν πραγμάτων.ἀλλὰ τὸ ἐγέννησε, φησίν, αὐτό, καὶ τὸ γεγέννηται,τί ἄλλο, ἢ ἀρχὴν εἰσάγει γεννήσεως; τί οὖν ἂν μηδὲ τοῦτολέγωμεν, ἀλλ’ ἦν ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς γεγεννημένος, ἵνα σου ῥᾳδίωςφύγωμεν τὰς περιέργους ἐνστάσεις καὶ Φιλοχρόνους; ἆραγραφὴν ἀποίσεις καθ’ ἡμῶν, ὡς παραχαραττόντων τι τῆςγραφῆς καὶ τῆς ἀληθείας; ἢ πᾶσιν εὔδηλον, ὅτι πολλὰτῶν χρονικῶς λεγομένων ἐνηλλαγμένως τοῖς χρόνοις προΦέρεται,καὶ μάλιστα παρὰ τῇ συνηθείᾳ τῆς γραφῆς,οὐχ ὅσα τοῦ παρεληλυθότος χρόνου μόνον ἐστίν, ἢ τοῦπαρόντος, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὅσα τοῦ μέλλοντος; ὡς τό· Ἵνα τί5 ἐγέννησεν αὐτὸ φησιν f || 12 τῆς] + θείας b1. ἐξ ἀμφοῖν] not the same ἄμφωas above, but here as if = ἐκ δυοῖν.Gr. is thinking chiefly how our sonshipdiffers from that of the EternalSon, and leaves the difference of thefatherhood. Each of us has twoparents, not one, so that we are ina way divided between them.2. κατ’ δλ. ἄνθρ.] another difference;we only gradually attain theposition of human beings by a longfashioning in the womb, and somehardly attain it at all. In the lastclause no doubt Gr. means idiotsand persons otherwise deficient.The wishes of human parents fortheir offspring are often far frombeing realised οἶοι μὴ τεθ.).3. ἀφιέντες] The children inmany cases go their way, and theparents theirs, and nothing is left ofthe sacred relationship except thename.5. ἐγέννησε] We have beenusing expressions like ‘begat’ and‘is begotten,’ which necessarilybesides the notion of begetting,the tense-notion of a moment when.To evade the difficulty, Gr. proposesto use a formula which puts the‘moment’ back before the beginningof time, and to say that the Son‘was’ already ‘begotten from thebeginning.’9. γραφὴν ἀποίσεις καθ’ ἤμ’.] alegal term, which has only an accidentalrelation to the use of γραφὴimmediately after in the sense of’Scripture.’ It means ‘to file anaccusation?ib. παραχαραττόντων] ‘puttinga false mark ’ i.e. ‘falsifying’;chiefly used of coin that has beentampered with.11. ἐνηλλαγμ. τ. χρδν.] Much ofour language which denotes time isused in an inverse manner to thetime intended.14. ἴνα τί ἐφρ.] Psalm ii 1.ἐφρύαξαν ἔθνη; οὔπω γὰρ ἐφρυάξαντο· καί, Ἐν ποταμῷδιελεύσονται ποδί· ὅπερ ἐστί, διαβεβήκασι. καὶ μακρὸνἂν εἴη πάσας ἀπαριθμεῖν τὰς τοιαύτας φωνάς, αἳ τοῖςφιλοπόνοις τετήρηνται.τοῦτο μὲν δὴ τοιοῦτον. οἷον δὲ αὐτῶν κἀκεῖνο, ὡςλίαν δύσερι καὶ ἀναίσχυντον* βουληθείς, φασι, γεγέννηκετὸν υἱόν, ἢ μὴ βουλόμενος. εἶτα δεσμοῦσιν, ὡς οἴονται,ἀμφοτέρωθεν ἅμμασιν, οὐκ ἰσχυροῖς, ἁλλὰ καὶ λίαν σαθροῖς.εἰ μὲν γὰρ οὐ θέλων, φασί, τετυράννηται. καὶ τίςτο ὁ τυραννήσας; καὶ πῶς ὁ τυραννηθεὶς θεός; εἰ δὲ θέλων,θελήσεως υἱὸς ὁ υἱός· πῶς οὖν ἐκ τοῦ πατρός; καὶ καινήντινα μητέρα τὴν θέλησιν ἀντὶ τοῦ πατρὸς ἀναπλάττουσιν.ἓν μὲν οὖν τοῦτο χαρίεν αὐτῶν, ἂν τοῦτο λέγωσιν, ὅτι τοῦπάθους ἀποστάντες ἐπὶ τὴν βούλησιν καταφεύγουσιν· οὐγὰρ πάθος ἡ βούλησις. δεύτερον δὲ ἴδωμεν τὸ ἰσχυρὸν3 εἴη] ην f 6 φασι] φησι df || 7 οιονται] οιον τε ’duo Colb.’ ||11 καινὴν] κενὴν ’Reg. Cypr.’1. ἐν ποταμῶ Psalm lxv (lxvi)6.4. τετήρηνται] ‘have been observed.’6. ’Did the Father beget theSon,’ asks the opponent, ‘by an actof will, or not? If not, He wastinder constraint, which is impossible;if so, then the Son owes Hisbeing not to the Father only, butalso to the Father's will, zvhich thusbecomes α kind of motherhood.’ Thisdilemma is met by a similar onewith regard to the ’s οὗκbirth, and by another with regard tocreation. Gr. then shews that ἃς aword is not the result of speaking,considered as α separate ajtd sub-stantive thing, but springs directfrom the speaker, so the thing willedsprings not from will in the abstract,but direct from him who wills.8. σαθροῖς] Cp. i 3.11. πῶς οὖν ἐκ τοῦ π.] It certainlyseems a strangely captiousargument. If it was ever seriouslyurged by the Eunomians, we mustsuppose that θέλων is not merely =ἑκών, but ’by willing’; i.e. it wasthe act of will which produced theSon. Then, as other faculties ofthe divine being are represented tous as hypostatic — notably the Λόγος— we are driven to suppose thatthis primary faculty, antecedent andnecessary to the production of theSon, is hypostatic also. If that isthe case, He does not owe Hisbeing solely to the Father, butpartly also to the ’s Will,which is thus constituted a kind ofmother in the Godhead. But Gr.'ssubsequent words ἂν τοῦτο λέγωσινsuggest the doubt whether he didnot himself invent this part of theargument for the Eunomians.13. αὐτῶν] depends upon χαρίεν(av εἴη) by an idiom well known incolloquial English as well as inGreek; ‘it it will be delightful ofthem.’14. οὐ γὰρ πάθος ἢ β.] This istrue; nevertheless it is difficult forthe human mind to imagine an actof will which is not caused by somethingwhich would come under thedescription of a πάθος.αὐτῶν, ὅ τι λέγουσιν. ἄριστον δὲ αὐτοῖς συμπλακῆναιπρότερον ἐγγυτέρω. σὺ δὲ αὐτὸς ὁ λέγων εὐχερῶς ὅ τι ἃνἐθέλῃς, ἐκ θέλοντος ὑπέστης τοῦ σοῦ πατρός, ἢ μὴ θέλοντος;εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἐξ οὐ θέλοντος, τετυράννηται. τῆς βίας·καὶ τίς ὁ τυραννήσας αὐτόν; οὐ γὰρ δὴ τὴν φύσιν ἐρεῖς·ἐκείνη γὰρ ἔχει καὶ τὸ σωφρονεῖν. εἰ δὲ θέλοντος, ἀπόλωλέσοι δι’ ὀλίγας συλλαβὰς ὁ πατήρ. θελήματος γὰρ υἱός,ἁλλ’ οὐ πατρὸς ἀναπέφηνας. ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τὸν θεὸν μέτειμικαὶ τὰ κτίσματα, καὶ τὸ σὸν ἐρώτημα προσάγω τῇ σῇσοφίᾳ. θέλων ὑπέστησε τὰ πάντα, ἢ βιασθείς; εἰ μὲνβιασθείς, κἀνταῦθα ἡ τυραννίς, καὶ ὁ τυραννήσας. εἰδὲ βουλόμενος, ἐστέρηται τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τὰ κτίσματα, καὶσὺ πρὸ τῶν ἄλλων, ὁ τοιούτους ἀνευρίσκων λογισμοὺςκαὶ τοιαῦτα σοφιζόμενος. θελήσει γὰρ μέσῃ τοῦ κτίστουδιατειχίζεται. ἁλλ’ ἕτερον, οἶμαι, θέλων ἐστὶ καὶ θέλησις,2 αν] ἔαν b || 3 εθελης] θέλῃς def ΙΙ 7 θεληματος] θελήσεως def || 10 υπεστησε]+ θεὸς bcd: + ο θεὸς ef || 14 θελησει] θέλησις b || om γὰρ b || 15 ἐστινοἴμαι θέλων bdf1. τὸ ἴσχ’. αὐτ’. ö τι λ] ‘what theyconsider their strong point? Δεύτερονδὲ corresponds to ἐν μέν. Before,however, entering upon thisδεύτερον, which he does at ἀλλ’ ἐπὶτ. θ., Gr. thinks it best πρότερον)to grapple with his adversaries atcloser quarters. This he does in thequestion σὺ δὲ αὐτός κτλ., whichbrings the argument home to thempersonally ἐγγυτέρω).5. οὐ γὰρ δὴ τὴν φύσιν ἐρεῖς]‘You will not say that he was compelledby nature. Nature admitsequally of self-restraint.’10. ὑπέστησε] ‘gave them existence,’ence? i.e. by creation.12. ἐσηρηται τοῦ θ.κ. τὰ κτ] As,ace. to their supposed argument,the Son is deprived of the Fatherby the interposition of the Willfrom which He sprang, so is creationdeprived of its Creator. HisWill runs like a wall between itand Him. The Eunomian is thefirst to suffer the loss, becausehe invented it; that is poeticaljustice.15. ἕτερον οἷμαι] Gr.'s argumentis not very clear; because the Eunomiansalso had distinguished verysharply between the will and theperson who wills, — so sharply thatthey said that the Son could not bethe Son of one who willed to begetHim, but only of that will itself.But in so arguing they set upa new, though fictitious, identity.They converted the will itself intoa personal agency. This is whatGr. combats. Will is one thing,and the person who wills is another.You might as well say that thething begotten is the son of beget-ting, or trace the thing spoken tospeaking instead of the speaker, asthus erect will into a substantiveand independent force.γεννῶν καὶ γέννησις, λέγων καὶ λόγος, εἰ μὴ μεθύομεν. τὰμὲν ὁ κινούμενος, τὰ δὲ οἷον ἡ κίνησις. οὔκουν θελήσεωςτὸ θεληθέν· οὐδὲ γὰρ ἕπεται πάντως· οὐδὲ τὸ γεννηθὲνγεννήσεως, οὐδὲ τὸ ἀκουσθὲν ἐκφωνήσεως, ἀλλὰ τοῦ θέλοντος,καὶ τοῦ γεννήσαντος, καὶ τοῦ λέγοντος. τὰ τοῦ θεοῦ δὲκαὶ ὑπὲρ πάντα ταῦτα, ᾧ γέννησίς ἐστιν ἴσως ἡ τοῦ γεννᾷνθέλησις, ἀλλ’ οὐδὲν μέσον, εἴ γε καὶ τοῦτο δεξώμεθα ὅλως,ἀλλὰ μὴ καὶ θελήσεως κρείττων ἢ γέννησις.Βούλει τι προσπαίξω καὶ τὸν πατέρα; παρὰ σοῦγὰρ ἔχω τὰ τοιαῦτα τολμᾷν. θέλων θεὸς ὁ πατήρ, ἢ μὴθέλων. καὶ ὅπως ἀποφεύξῃ τὸ σὸν περιδέξιον, εἰ μὲν δὴθέλων, πότε τοῦ θέλειν ἠργμένος; οὐ γὰρ πρὶν εἶναι· οὐδὲγὰρ ἦν τι πρότερον. ἢ τὸ μὲν αὐτοῦ θελῆσαν, τὸ δὲ1 μεθύωμεν b ΙΙ 5 γεννῶντος cdefg || 7 δεξ̣ͅομεθα deg ‘Or. 1’1. τὰ μέν] i.e. the series θέλων,γεννῶν, λέγων; τὰ δέ, i.e. the seriesθέλησις, γέννησις, λόγος.3. οὐδὲ γὰρ ἕπεται πάντως] Gr.is using ἕπεται in its logical sense.He does not mean that in the orderof facts the act of will sometimesfails of its effect; he means that itdoes not ‘follow’ that, because athing has been willed, that thing isthe result of will. It is the resultof the personal force lying behindthe will.5. τὰ τοῦ θεοῦ δέ] All this holdstrue even in the experience of ourlimited personalities; much moremay we suppose it to be so inregard to the divine nature. WithGod, so far as we know ἴσως), willand action are identical, and thereis no medium whatever.7. καὶ τοῦτο] i.e. the propositionthat γέννησις = ἡ τοῦ γ. θ. Gr. evidentlyinclines rather to the viewthat ‘the generation ὁ the Son ofGod is even above and beyondwill.’7. Gr. retaliates by asking howGod comes to be God. If by Hiswill, when did He first will it? isone portion of His being the result ofthe will of another portion? is Henot in this case as much a child ofwill as the Son? If He is Godwithout willing to be so, then He isunder compulsion.‘How then, is the Son begotten?’asks the Eunomian. ‘How is Hecreated?’ οἱ. replies. Men docreate in the way which it isto assume was ’s way.9. βούλει τι κτλ.] ’Do you wishme to make sport awhile with theFather also? ’ Hitherto the ‘sport’has been with the Son. Gr. intentionallyuses a shocking expression.11. καὶ ὅπως ἀποφ.] ’and in orderthat you may escape: The mainverb is the imperative implied inthe question πότε. . . ἠργμένος μόνος — ‘tellme when.’12. πρὶν εἶναι] sc θεός; ‘not befpreHe was so; for He tvas neveranything before.’13. τὸ μὲν αὐτοῦ] ‘or did one partof Him will it, while the other partwas the result of that will?θεληθέν; μεριστὸς οὖν. πῶς δὲ οὐ θελήσεως καὶ οὗτος,κατὰ σέ, πρόβλημα; εἰ δὲ οὐ θέλων, τί τὸ βιασάμενον εἰςτὸ εἶναι; καὶ πῶς θεός, εἰ βεβίασται, καὶ ταῦτα οὐκἄλλο τι ἢ αὐτὸ τὸ εἶναι θεός; πῶς οὖν γεγέννηται; πῶςἔκτισται, εἴπερ ἔκτισται κατὰ σέ; καὶ γὰρ καὶ τοῦτο τῆςαὐτῆς ἀπορίας. τάχα ἂν εἴποις, βουλήσει καὶ λόγῳ.ἀλλ’ οὔπω λέγεις τὸ πᾶν. πῶς γὰρ ἔργου δύναμιν ἔσχενἡ βούλησις καὶ ὁ λόγος; ἔτι λείπεται λέγειν. οὐ γὰροὕτως ἄνθρωπος.Πῶς οὖν γεγέννηται; οὐκ ἂν ἢν μεγάλη ἡ γέννησις,εἰ σοὶ κατελαμβάνετο, ὃς οὐδὲ τὴν ἰδίαν ἐπίστῃ γέννησιν,ἢ μικρόν τι ταύτης κατείληφας, καὶ ὅσον αἰσχύνῃ λέγειν·ἔπειτα οἴει τὸ πᾶν γινώσκειν; πολλὰ ἂν κάμοις πρότερον,ἢ εὕροις λόγους συμπήξεως, μορφώσεως, φανερώσεως,ψυχῆς πρὸς σῶμα δεσμόν, νοῦ πρὸς ψυχήν, λόγου πρὸςνοῦν, κίνησιν, αὔξησιν, τροφῆς ἐξομοίωσιν, αἴσθησιν,μνήμην, ἀνάμνησιν, τἄλλα ἐξ ὧν συνέστηκας· καὶ τίναμὲν τοῦ συναμφοτέρου ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος, τίνα δὲτὰ μεμερισμένα, τίνα δὲ ἃ παρ’ ἀλλήλων λαμβάνουσιν·7. 1 ουν] + φησι bedf ΙΙ 6 ειποις] + ὅτι b 8. 13 οιει] οιη e || τα ce race2. εἰς τὸ εἶναι] again ’ to be so,’i.e. θεός.3. καἰ ταῦτα κτλ.] ‘and compelledto that very thing, namely tobe God.’4. πῶς οὖν] Gr. returns rapidlyto the original question, and againparries it by the counter questionas to the creation of the Son. Thedifficulty of imagining the creationis as great as that of imagining thegeneration.7. ἔργου δύν. ἔσχειν] ‘how cameit to have that effective force?"9. οὕτως] sc βούλεται καἰ λόγει.8. You do not understand yourown generation, or the law of yourown development; how can you expeelto understand that of God?That, however, ἲς no proof that Goddoes not beget. If nothing is to betrue but what you understand,must reduce the list of existences,beginning with that of God HimselfThe mode of the divine generationis evidently beyond us.14. λόγους συμπ.] ‘the formulae,’or ‘laws.’16. τροφῆς ἐξομ.] ‘assimilation offood.’17. μνήμην, ἀνάμν.] Cp. ii 22.ib. τίνα μέν] ‘what things belongto the united compound of soul andbody.’19. τὰ μεμερ.] We might haveexpected μεμερισμένων, ‘belong tosoul and body apart’; but it‘which are the things distributable’to soul and body respectively.ὧν γὰρ ὕστερον ἡ τελείωσις, τούτων οἱ λόγοι μετὰ τῆςγεννήσεως. εἰπὲ τίνες· καὶ μηδὲ τότε φιλοσοφήσῃς θεοῦγέννησιν· οὐ γὰρ ἀσφαλές. εἰ μὲν γὰρ τὴν σὴν γινώσκεις,οὐ πάντως καὶ τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ· εἰ δὲ μηδὲ τὴν σήν, πῶς τὴντοῦ θεοῦ; ὅσῳ γὰρ θεὸς ἀνθρώπου δυστεκμαρτότερος,τοσούτῳ καὶ τῆς σῆς γεννήσεως ἀληπτοτέρα ἡ ἄνω γέν-νησις. εἰ δὲ ὅτι μή σοι κατείληπται, διὰ τοῦτο οὐδὲγεγέννηται, ὥρα σοι πολλὰ διαγράφειν τῶν ὄντων, ἃ μὴκατείληφας, καὶ πρό γε ἁπάντων τὸν θεὸν αὐτόν· οὐδὲ γὰρὅ τι ποτέ ἐστιν εἰπεῖν ἔχεις, καὶ εἰ λίαν τολμηρὸς εἰ, καὶ τὰπεριττὰ μεγαλόψυχος. κατάβαλέ σου τὰς ῥεύσεις, καὶτὰς διαιρέσεις, καὶ τὰς τομάς, καὶ τὸ ὡς περὶ σώματοςδιανοεῖσθαι τῆς ἀσωμάτου φύσεως· καὶ τάχα ἃν ἄξιόν τιδιανοηθείης θεοῦ γεννήσεως. πῶς γεγέννηται; πάλιν γὰρτὸ αὐτὸ φθέγξομαι δυσχεραίνων. θεοῦ γέννησις σιωπῇτιμάσθω. μέγα σοι τὸ μαθεῖν, ὅτι γεγέννηται. τὸ δὲ πῶς,οὐδὲ ἀγγέλοις ἐννοεῖν, μὴ ὅτι γέ σοι νοεῖν συγχωρήσομεν.βούλει παραστήσω τὸ πῶς; ὡς οἶδεν ὁ γεννήσας πατήρ,καὶ ὁ γεννηθεὶς υἱός. τὸ δὲ ὑπὲρ ταῦτα νέφει κρύπτεται,τὴν σὴν διαφεῦγον ἀμβλυωπίαν.2 φιλοσοφήσεις af: -σοις ‘Or. Ι’ ΙΙ 9 ἀπάντων] πάντων ef ΙΙ οὐδὲ] οὐ bf ||διανοηθείης] + πέρι b II 17 ἀγγέλοις μὴ ὅτι γε σοι ἐννοεῖν b II om νοεῖνdf ΙΙ συγχωρήσωμεν aefg || 20 ἀποφεῦγον a1. ὧν γὰρ ὔστ. ἡ τελ.] Althoughsome parts and faculties of our natureonly reach their perfection at alater time, the law of their developmentment is present in the very momentof generation.2. μηδὲ τότε] not even when youhave stated the laws of human development.8. διαγράφειν] ’to cancel,’ ‘strikeoff the list.’ Cp. v23.11. κατάβαλέ σου τὰς ᾿ρ.] ‘dropyour dissipations. ’ The Eunomiansconceived of the orthodox theologyin a materialistic way, and proceededto apply to it language of thiskind. For ῥεύσεις cp. v 31; forδιαιρ. and τομάς cp. i 6.15. δυσχεραίνων] ‘with loathing.’20. ἀμβλυωπίαν] ’the dulness of’your ’blinded sight.’9. A fresh puzzle is proposed bythe Eunomian. Does the Son existprior to generation, or not? Theanswer ἲς that there is no suchas a time prior to that generation.It is from all eternity. There is nomore need to ask whether the Son isἐξ ὄντων or ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων than thereis to ask the same question concerningthe Father. We are not compelledto believe that either one or the otherof two alternates is true. Takeinstances. Is time in time or outsideof time? A man says, ‘I amlying’: is he speaking the truth ornot? Were yon present at yourown conception or not? Both alternativesmay be false. The questionis absurd.ὄντα οὖν γεγέννηκεν, ἢ οὐκ ὄντα; τῶν ληρημάτων·περὶ ἐμὲ καὶ σὲ ταῦτα, οἳ τὸ μέν τι ἦμεν, ὥσπερ ἐν τῇὀσφύι τοῦ Ἀβραὰμ ὁ Λευὶ, τὸ δὲ γεγόναμεν’ ὥστε ἐξὄντων τρόπον τινὰ τὸ ἡμέτερον, καὶ οὐκ ὄντων· ἐναντίωςπερὶ τὴν ἀρχέγονον ὕλην ὑποστᾶσαν σαφῶς ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων,κἄν τινες ἀγένητον ἀναπλάττωσιν. ἐνταῦθα δὲ σύνδρομοντῷ εἶναι τὸ γεγεννῆσθαι, καὶ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς· ὥστε ποῦ θήσειςτὸ ἀμφίκρημνον τοῦτο ἐρώτημα; τί γὰρ τοῦ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆςπρεσβύτερον, ἵν ἐκεῖ θῶμεν τὸ εἶναί ποτε τοῦ υἱοῦ, ἢ τὸμὴ εἶναι; ἀμφοτέρως γὰρ τὸ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς λυθήσεται. εἰ μήσοι καὶ ὁ πατήρ, πάλιν ἐρωτώντων ἡμῶν, ἐξ ὄντων, ἢ ἐξ9. 1 τῶν] ω τῶν e || 6 ἀγένητον] ἀγέννητον def ΙΙ ἀναπλάττουσιν e ||7 τὼ εἶναι τὸ] τὸ εἶναι τὼ ‘Reg.’ a’ 9 η τὸ μὴ] om τὸ cd1. ὄντα] Α fresh difficulty: wasthe Son already in existence whenHe was begotten, or not? Gr.admits that the question might havesome meaning in regard to humangeneration. In one sense we alreadyexisted τὸ μέν τι); in another, wethen began to be (λγλόναμεν practically=ἐγενήθημεν).3. ὁ Λευί] Heb. vii 10.4. τὸ ἡμέτερον] = ἡμεῖς.6. κἄν τινες ἂγ. ἀναπλ.] Thereference is to ’s Timaeus.ib. σύνδρομον τῷ εἰ. τὸ γ.] ’Inthis ’ of the Eternal Son, ‘generationis coincident with existence,and is from all eternity.’7. ποῦ θήσεις] Where will youfind a place, a date, for your questionto apply to? ‘Already inexistence when He was begotten ’implies a time before the begetting;but there was no such time. Hewas begotten from the beginning.What was there before ’the begin-ning, ’ that we may say whether theSon then existed or not? In eithercase, whether we affirm or deny Hisexistence, it is clear that that subsequentmoment at which we supposeHim to have been begottencannot really have been the beginning.10. εἰ μή σοι κ. ὁ π.] If you stillpress your question, we will oncemore ask you about the Father,whether His existence is derivedfrom elements that were beforehandor from elements that were not.Perhaps then you will make outthat both propositions are true, andthat He has two modes or stages ofexistence, one before and the otherafter the absorption of those elements.Or you will choose thelatter alternative, and say of Him,as you say of the Son, that Hecomes into being from nothingness.If you are ready to admit this of theFather (such is the force of the εἰμή), there is some consistency inwhat you affirm of the Son.οὐκ ὄντων, κινδυνεύσειεν ἢ δὶς εἶναι, ὃ μὲν προών, ὃ δὲ ὤν,ἢ ταὐτὸν τῷ υἱῷ παθεῖν, ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων εἶναι, διὰ τὰ σὰ τῶνἐρωτημάτων παίγνια, καὶ τὰς ἐκ ψάμμων οἰκοδομάς, αἱμηδὲ αὔραις ἵστανται. ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν οὐδέτερον τούτωνδέχομαι, καὶ τὴν ἐρώτησίν φημι τὸ ἄτοπον ἔχειν, οὐχὶ τὸἄπορον τὴν ἀπάντησιν. εἰ δέ σοι φαίνεται ἀναγκαῖονεἶναι τὸ ἕτερον ἀληθεύειν ἐπὶ παντός, κατὰ τὰς σὰς δια-λεκτικὰς ὑπολήψεις, δέξαι μού τι μικρὸν ἐρώτημα. ὁχρόνος ἐν χρόνῳ, ἢ οὐκ ἐν χρόνῳ; εἰ μὲν οὖν ἐν χρόνῳ,IO τίνι τούτῳ; καὶ τί παρὰ τοῦτον ὄντι; καὶ πῶς περιέχοντι;εἰ δὲ οὐκ ἐν χρόνῳ, τίς ἢ περιττὴ σοφία χρόνον εἰσάγεινἄχρονον; τοῦ δέ, Νῦν ἐγὼ ψεύδομαι, δὸς τὸ ἕτερον, ἢἀληθεύεσθαι μόνον, ἢ ψεύδεσθαι· οὐ γὰρ ἀμφότερα δώ-σομεν. ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἐνδέχεται. ἢ γὰρ ψευδόμενος ἀληθεύσει,ἢ ἀληθεύων ψεύσεται· πᾶσα ἀνάγκη. τί οὖν θαυμαστόν,ὥσπερ ἐνταῦθα συμβαίνει τὰ ἐναντία, οὕτως ἐκεῖσε ἀμφότεραψεύδεσθαι, καὶ οὕτω σοι τὸ σοφὸν ἠλίθιον ἀναφανήσεται;ἓν ἔτι μοι λῦσον τῶν αἰνιγμάτων· σεαυτῷ δὲγεννωμένῳ παρῆς; πάρει δὲ νῦν; ἢ οὐδέτερον; εἰ μὲν γὰρκαὶ παρῆς, καὶ πάρει, ὡς τίς, καὶ τίνι; καὶ πῶς ὁ εἷςἄμφω γεγόνατε; εἰ δὲ μηδέτερον τῶν εἰρημένων, πῶς3 ἐκ ψάμμων] εξ ἄμμων a || οἰκοδομίας ac || 12 om η ’duo Reg.’1. ö μὲν πρ., δ δὲ ὤν] For thisuse of δ (here accus.) cp. Matt.xiii 8.4. μ. αὔραις ἵστανται] ‘cannoteven stand a puff of wind’; a naturaluse of ἴστ’. but difficult to parallel.ib. τούτων] of the two alternatives,ὄντα ἢ οὐκ ὄντα γεγέννηκεν.5. τὸ ἄπορον τὴν ἀπ’.] Α chiasm:ἀπάντ. corresponds to ἐρώτ., as τὸἄπορον to τὸ ἄτοπον. It is not thatthe encounter presents a difficulty,but the question presents an ab-surdity.10. τί παρὰ τοῦτον ὄντι] ’what isit besides the time which is in it?and how does it contain that ?’12. τοῦ δέ, Νῦν ἐγὼ ψ.] Α well-knownpuzzle. ’"I am now tellinga lie." One thing or the other; isthe statement true or false? Wewill not admit that it is both.you answer, it is impossible to adoptthe one alternative to the exclusionof the other, for if he is lying, hespeaks the truth, and if he speaksthe truth, he lying.’15. τί οὖν θαυμαστόν] As, in thecase of the ψευδόμενος, contradictoriesare reconciled, so we neednot be surprised if, in the proposeddilemma of ὄντα ἢ οὐκ ὄντα, bothalternatives are false.17. ἠλίθιον] ‘silly.’σεαυτοῦ χωρίζῃ; καὶ τίς ἡ αἰτία τῆς διαζεύξεως; ἀλλ’ἀπαίδευτον περὶ τοῦ ἑνός, εἰ ἑαυτῷ πάρεστιν, ἢ μή,πολυπραγμονεῖν. ταῦτα γὰρ ἐπ’ ἄλλων, οὐχ ἑαυτοῦ λέγεται.ἀπαιδευτότερον, εὖ ἴσθι, τὸ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς γεγεννημένον,εἰ ἢν πρὸ τῆς γεννήσεως, ἢ οὐκ ἦν, διευθύνεσθαι. οὗτοςγὰρ περὶ τῶν χρόνῳ διαιρετῶν ὁ λόγος.Ἀλλ’ οὐ ταὐτόν, φησι, τὸ ἀγέννητον καὶ τὸγεννητόν. εἰ δὲ τοῦτο, οὐδὲ ὁ υἱὸς τῷ πατρὶ ταὐτόν. ὅτιμὲν φανερῶς ὁ λόγος οὗτος ἐκβάλλει τὸν υἱὸν τῆς θεότητος,ἢ τὸν πατέρα, τί χρὴ λέγειν; εἰ γὰρ τὸ ἀγέννητον οὐσία ΙΟθεοῦ, τὸ γεννητὸν οὐκ οὐσία· εἰ δὲ τοῦτο, οὐκ ἐκεῖνο. τίςἀντερεῖ λόγος; ἑλοῦ τοίνυν τῶν ἀσεβειῶν ὁποτέραν βούλει,ὦ κενὲ θεολόγε, εἴπερ ἀσεβεῖν πάντως ἐσπούδακας. ἔπειταπῶς οὐ ταὐτὸν λέγεις τὸ ἀγέννητον καὶ τὸ γεννητόν; εἰ μὲντὸ μὴ ἐκτισμένον καὶ ἐκτισμένον, κἀγὼ δέχομαι. οὐ γὰρταὐτὸν τῆ φύσει τὸ ἄναρχον καὶ τὸ κτιζόμενον. εἰ δὲ τὸ1 σεαυτοῦ] ἑαυτοῦ ’in nonnull.’ || 2 απαιδευτον] + το bdf 10. 7 φασι b ||10 χρὴ] + καὶ cef Ἴ’ 13 κενε] καινὲ c1. ἀλλ’ ἀπαίδευτον] Ἀλλά = at;as above, ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἐνδέχεται. ‘Nay,you will answer, it is stupid toenquire about a single individual,whether he is present with himself,or not. Those things apply to otherpeople, not to oneself.’5. διευθύνεσθαι] ‘to be settingpeople to rights about the questionwhether.’6. περὶ τῶν χρ. διαιρ.] ᾿aboutthings which are divided by an intervalof time.’10. ‘Begotten and Unbegottenare not the same; therefore if theSon is begotten and the Father unbegotten,the Son differs from theFather.’ The statement is false;it is the very meaning of generationto transmit the nature of the parent.The contrast of begotten and unbegottensis only like that of wise anduniwise, which can be predicated ofdifferent individuals without involvomgα difference of nature or essence.To erect Unbegottenness into Constitutingthe very essence of Godbrings you into difficulties with otherattributes, like Immortal, Unchangesable,able, which have ἃς good a right tobe considered ἃς constituting thatessence.7. οὐ ταὐτόν] ‘not the same thing’;i.e. a difference of nature itself isinvolved.14. πῶς οὐ ταὐτόν] llOt ’ III whatsense do you ’ for Gr. is notprepared to admit that it is true inany sense ; but simply challengingthe statement altogether: ’ how canyou say so? if you had said thaicreated and uncreated are not tinsame, I should agree with you,but the transmission of the ’snature is of the very essence ofgeneration.’γεγεννηκὸς καὶ τὸ γεγεννημένον, οὐκ ὀρθῶς λέγεται. ταὐτὸνγὰρ εἶναι πᾶσα ἀνάγκη. αὕτη γὰρ φύσις γεννήματος,ταὐτὸν εἶναι τῷ γεγεννηκότι κατὰ τὴν φύσιν. ἢ οὕτωπάλιν· πῶς λέγεις τὸ ἀγέννητον καὶ τὸ γεννητόν; εἰ μὲντὴν ἀγεννησίαν αὐτὴν καὶ τὴν γέννησιν, οὐ ταὐτόν·εἰ δὲ οἷς ὑπάρχει ταῦτα, πῶς οὐ ταὐτόν; ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸἄσοφον καὶ τὸ σοφὸν ἀλλήλοις μὲν οὐ ταὐτά, περὶ ταὐτὸνδέ, τὸν ἄνθρωπον· καὶ οὐκ οὐσίας τέμνει, περὶ δὲ τὴν αὐτὴνοὐσίαν τέμνεται. ἢ καὶ τὸ ἀθάνατον, καὶ τὸ ἄκακον, καὶτὸ ἀναλλοίωτον οὐσία θεοῦ. ἀλλ’ εἰ τοῦτο, πολλαὶ οὐσίαιθεοῦ, καὶ οὐ μία. ἢ σύνθετον ἐκ τούτων τὸ θεῖον. οὐ γὰρἀσυνθέτως ταῦτα, εἴπερ οὐσίαι.ταῦτα μὲν οὔ φασι, κοινὰ γὰρ καὶ ἄλλων. ὃ δὲμόνου θεοῦ καὶ ἴδιον, τοῦτο οὐσία. οὐκ ἂν μὲν συγχωρήσαιενεἶναι μόνου θεοῦ τὸ ἀγέννητον οἱ καὶ τὴν ὕλην καὶ1 γεγεννημένον] + οὐ ταὐτὸν λέγεις dg || 1 φύσις] + γεννήτορος καὶ be ||3 φύσιν] + τὸ γέννημα b || 4 εἰ μὲν] + γὰρ e || 5 τὴν ἄγεν.] om τὴν e5. τὴν ἀγενν. αὐτήν] ’ unbegottennessitself? the very character of notbeing begotten.7. περὶ ταὐτὸν δέ] not, of course,περὶ τὸν αὐτόν. They are oppositecharacteristics, but both are foundin man without any difference ofnature being involved. The wiseman and the foolish man are alikeman.8. οὐκ οὐσίας τ.] ‘they do notdivide the essences; they are divisions(lit. divided) within (in connexionwith) the same essence.’9. ἢ καὶ τὸ ἀθ’.] Α fresh argument.If τὸ ἀγέννητον constitutesthe divine nature, so that it andτὸ θεῖον are convertible terms, asimilar case can be made out forthese other predicates. Then, sincethe divine nature is absolutely identifiedwith τὸ ἀγέννητον, and yetat the same time with τὸ ἀθάνατον,we are driven to suppose that theseare separate natures, or essences, orthat they compose the divine natureby their aggregation.11. Assume for the sake of argumentthat to be unbegotten belongsto God alone, though the assertionwould by some be denied. It doesnot follow that unbegottenness is anecessary part of the divine essence.Adam alone was directly fashionedby God; yet Seth is as truly manas Adam. The divine essence is apositive, not α negative thing. Ifyou ask me what it is, I cananswer that I hope we may knowsome day, but not here. Meanwhile,whatever glory there is in the underivedexistence belongs to the Sonwho is begotten of the Underived.13. κοινὰ γάρ] Angels e.g. areἀθάνατοι; doves and lambs are calledἄκακα.15. οἱ καὶ τὴν ὔ.] The Platonists.Gr. does not adopt their opinion.He only uses it to embarrass theEunomian. He might have citedin like manner the ’darkness,’ whichthe Manichees made to be coeternalwith light ; but he disdains to do so.τὴν ἰδέαν συνεισάγοντες ὡς ἀγέννητα. τὸ γὰρ Μανιχαίωνπορρωτέρω ῥίψωμεν σκότος. πλὴν ἔστω μόνου θεοῦ. τίδὲ ὁ Ἀδάμ; οὐ μόνος πλάσμα θεοῦ; καὶ πάνυ, φήσεις.ἆρ’ οὖν καὶ μόνος ἄνθρωπος; οὐδαμῶς. τί δή ποτε; ὅτιμὴ ἀνθρωπότης ἡ πλάσις· καὶ γὰρ τὸ γεννηθὲν ἄνθρωπος.οὕτως οὐδὲ τὸ ἀγέννητον μόνον θεός, εἰ καὶ μόνου πατρός,ἁλλὰ δέξαι καὶ τὸ γεννητὸν εἶναι θεόν. ἐκ θεοῦ γάρ, εἰκαὶ λίαν εἰ φιλαγέννητος. ἔπειτα πῶς οὐσίαν θεοῦ λέγεις,οὐ τὴν τοῦ ὄντος θέσιν, ἁλλὰ τὴν τοῦ μὴ ὄντος ἀναίρεσιν;τὸ γὰρ μὴ ὑπάρχειν αὐτῷ γέννησιν ὁ λόγος δηλοῖ, οὐχὃ τὴν φύσιν ἐστὶ παρίστησιν, οὐδ’ ὃ ὑπάρχει τὸ μὴ ἔχονγέννησιν. τίς οὖν οὐσία θεοῦ; τῆς σῆς ἀπονοίας τοῦτολέγειν, ὃς πολυπραγμονεῖς καὶ τὴν γέννησιν. ἡμῖν δὲμέγα, κἂν εἴποτε καὶ εἰς ὕστερον τοῦτο μάθοιμεν, λυθέντοςἡμῖν τοῦ ζόφου καὶ τῆς παχύτητος, ὡς ἡ τοῦ ἀψευδοῦςὑπόσχεσις. τοῦτο μὲν οὖν καὶ νοείσθω καὶ ἐλπιζέσθωτοῖς ἐπὶ τούτῳ καθαιρομένοις. ἡμεῖς δὲ τοσοῦτον εἰπεῖνθαρρήσομεν, ὅτι εἰ καὶ μέγα τῷ πατρὶ τὸ μηδαμόθεν11. 1 ἀγένητα de || 2 ριψωμεν] -ομεν b ΙΙ 5 γὰρ] + καὶ d || 6 fiovov]μόνος c || 11 om ἐστι df || o] ω e2 || 14 om εἰς ’Reg. a’ 15 ws] +φησιν b || 17 τούτω] τοῦτο g || 18 θαρρήσομεν] -ωμεν adef2. ἔστω] for argument's sake, hewill assume that none but God isunbegotten. That does not precludethe possibility of One who isbegotten being God likewise, anymore than the fact that Adam alonewas directly formed by God precludesothers who are not so formedfrom having the same nature asAdam.6. ovbt τὸ ἂγ. μόνον θεός] Itwould not be true to say that onlywhat is unbegotten can be God —though nothing can be God whichis not begotten of the Father; youmust admit that what is begotten ofHim is God likewise.8. πῶς οὐσίαν θ. λ] How can amerely negative attribute be spokenof as constituting the essence ofGod? Cp. ii 9.11. ὂ τὴν φύσιν ἐστι] ‘what Heis by nature; nor what it is thathas no generation.’12. τοῦτο λέγειν] ’to ash the question.’Πολυπρ., cp. ii. 9.15. ὡς ἡ τοῦ ἂψ. vir.] Prob. Gr.refers to 1 Gor. xiii 12; cp. iiὉ ἀψευδής, Tit. i17. τοῖς ἐπὶ τ. καθαιρ] Gp. ii 12τοῖς ἐνταῦθα κεκ. . . .πρὸς τὸ ποθούμένον.18. εἰ καἰ μέγα κτλ.] If it is agreat thing to be altogether underived,as the Father is, it is noless a thing to be derived from Himin the way the Son is. He sharesthe nature and glory of the Selfexistent,and has the additionalglory of being begotten of Him.Cp. iv 7.ὡρμῆσθαι, οὐκ ἔλαττον τῷ υἱῷ τὸ ἐκ τοιούτου πατρός.τῆς τε γὰρ τοῦ ἀναιτίου δόξης μετέχοι ἄν, ὅτι ἐκ τοῦἀναιτίου, καὶ πρόσεστι τὸ τῆς γεννήσεως, πρᾶγμα τοσοῦτονκαὶ οὕτω σεβάσμιον τοῖς μὴ πάντῃ χαμαιπετέσι καὶὑλικοῖς τὴν διάνοιαν.Ἀλλ’ εἰ ταὐτὸν τῷ πατρί, φασιν, ὁ υἱὸς κατ’οὐσίαν, ἀγέννητον δὲ ὁ πατήρ, ἔσται τοῦτο καὶ ὁ υἱός.καλῶς, εἴπερ οὐσία θεοῦ τὸ ἀγέννητον, ἵν ᾖ τις καινὴμίξις, γεννητοαγέννητον. εἰ δὲ περὶ οὐσίαν ἡ διαφορά,τί τοῦτο ὡς ἰσχυρὸν λέγεις; ἢ καὶ σὺ πατὴρ τοῦ πατρός,ἵνα μηδενὶ λείπῃ τοῦ σοῦ πατρός, ἐπειδὴ ταὐτὸν εἶ κατ’οὐσίαν; ἢ δῆλον ὅτι, τῆς ἰδιότητος ἀκινήτου μενούσης,ζητήσομεν οὐσίαν θεοῦ, ἥ τις ποτέ ἐστιν, εἴπερ ζητήσομεν;ὅτι δὲ οὐ ταὐτὸν ἀγέννητον καὶ θεός, ὧδε ἂν μάθοις. εἰ4 σεβασμιον] σεμνὸν ‘Reg, a’ II χαμαιπετέσι] χαμερπέσι b 12. 6 ταῦτονφασι τὼ πατρὶ ο ὑίος b: ταὐτὸν φ. ο ὑίος τὼ πατρὶ df || 7 ἀγέννητος bde ||9 om ’δε c || 10 om η c12.‘If ’the Father is unbegotten,’they urge, ‘and the Son is what theFather is, then the Son too is unbegotten.’That would be true ifunbegottenness zuere the actual essenceof God; but it is ἴοι. If ‘unbegotten’and ‘God’ were equivalentterms, then we should be able to putthe one for the other, and say notonly ’ the God of Israel’ but ‘theUnbegotten of Israel? On this theory,the nature of the begotten Son is notonly different from that of the unbegottenFather, but is its exactopposite; and indeed it might beargued that since the positive is priorto the negative, the begotten Son isprior to the unbegotten Father.7. ἔσται τοῦτο] sc. ἀγέννητονQuite true, Gr. replies, on the assumptionthat unbegottenness is theessence of God; the Son in thatcase will be begotten-unbegotten!9. περὶ οὐσίαν] The prep, isemphatic. It is used as in § 10sub fin. ‘If the difference betweenbegotten and unbegotten is (not oneof nature but only) one affecting themodes of that nature.’10. πατὴρ τοῦ π.] ‘Are you yourfather's father?’ If not, ace. toyour argument, you cannot have thesame essence as your father.12. ἰδιότητος] not ’’personality’but the special distinguishing peculiaritieswhich differentiate one personfrom another; the ‘property,’as Hooker calls it (E. P. v 51). Ifwe enquire at all what the natureof God is, we will do so withouttouching these individual properties.ταὐτὸν ἦν, ἔδει πάντως, ἐπειδὴ τινῶν θεὸς ὁ θεός, τινῶνεἶναι καὶ τὸ ἀγέννητον· ἢ ἐπεὶ μηδενὸς τὸ ἀγέννητον, μηδὲτὸν θεὸν εἶναι τινῶν. τὰ γὰρ πάντῃ ταὐτὰ καὶ ὁμοίωςἐκφέρεται. ἀλλὰ μὴν οὐ τινῶν τὸ ἀγέννητον, τίνων γάρ;καὶ τινῶν θεὸς ὁ θεός, πάντων γάρ. πῶς οὖν ἂν εἴη ταὐτὸνθεὸς καὶ ἀγέννητον; καὶ πάλιν, ἐπειδὴ τὸ ἀγέννητον καἲτὸ γεννητὸν ἀντίκειται ἀλλήλοις, ὡς ἕξις καὶ στέρησις,ἀνάγκη καὶ οὐσίας εἰσαχθῆναι ἀντικειμένας ἀλλήλαις,ὅπερ οὐ δέδοται· ἢ ἐπειδὴ πάλιν αἱ ἕξεις τῶν στερήσεωνπρότεραι, καὶ ἀναιρετικαὶ τῶν ἕξεων αἱ στερήσεις, μὴμόνον πρεσβυτέραν εἶναι τῆς τοῦ πατρὸς οὐσίας τὴν τοῦυἱοῦ, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀναιρουμένην ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρός, ὅσον ἐπὶταῖς σαῖς ὑποθέσεσι.8 εἰσαχθῆναι] ἀντεισαχθῆναι b1. τινῶν ὁ θεός] ’God,’ acc. toGr., is a relative term; a ’ God ’must be ’God of’ some one. Ifthen unbegottenness is the veryessence of God, and ‘unbegotten’and ‘God’ are convertible terms,then we must be able to say withequal correctness, ’ the God of all ’and ‘the unbegotten of all’; orconversely, as the unbegotten is ’noone's unbegotten,’ so God must be‘no one's God.‘ The argumentdoes not seem a very valuable one,because, to begin with, it must bequestioned whether ‘God’ is reallya term of relationship. If it beso, then apart from creation Godwould not be God. But the mainpurpose of the argument is sound,inasmuch as it shews the absurdityof identifying absolutely the positiveexistence of God with a merelynegative description. On Gr. ’s interprettationof the word θεός, see iv18.3. ὁμοίως ἐκφέρεται] True synonymsare used interchangeably (lit.’are produced, employed, in a similarmanner’); cp. προφέρεται in § 5.8. ἀνάγκη] If ἀγέννητον is thevery nature of God, and yet Godbegets a Son (which the Eunomiansin a sense allow), it follows that thenature of the Son is not only differentfrom that of the Father, butis diametrically opposite to it. Thisis not allowed by any one οὐ δέδοται).9. αἱ ἔξεις τῶν ’στ’. πρότεραι] Youcannot take away a thing which isnot there to begin with. But ἀγέννητονimplies a taking away of γέννεννητάν.Therefore γέννητον is priorto ἀγέννητον, — the Son to the Father,— and when the Father comes,and His ἀγέννητον is alone recongisedas divine, He does awaywith the Son who occupied theground before Him. Of course thisargument is one of mere mockeryἐρεσχελία, i 3).13. ’If the begetting of the Sonis not a thing finished ἀν’ ’done with,it is as yet incomplete, and will oneday be completed: if it is finished, itmust have begun.’ That does notfollow. ἱν soul had a beginning,but will never have an end.No; our belief is, that whateverpossesses the essential notes of a classof beings — say of α horse or an ox —is rightly called by that name, whateverdistinctive properties it mayhave which mark it off from othersof the class. So it ἲς with God; thenature is one, although there aredifferences of designation, correspondingto differences hi fact, between thePersons who share that natitre.τίς ἔτι λόγος αὐτοῖς τῶν ἀφύκτων; τάχα ἂν ἐπ’ἐκεῖνο καταφύγοιεν τελευταῖον· ὡς εἰ μὲν οὐ πέπαυται τοῦγεννᾷν ὁ θεός, ἀτελὴς ἡ γέννησις, καί ποτε παύσεται.εἰ πέπαυται δέ, πάντως καὶ ἤρξατο. πάλιν οἱ σωματικοὶτὰ σωματικά. ἐγὼ δὲ εἰ μὲν ἀίδιον αὐτῷ τὸ γεννᾶσθαι,ἢ μή, οὔπω λέγω, ἕως ἂν τὸ Πρὸ πάντων βουνῶν γεννᾶμε ἀκριβῶς ἐπισκέψωμαι. οὐχ ὁρῶ δὲ τίς ἡ ἀνάγκητοῦ λόγου. εἰ γὰρ ἦρκται κατ’ αὐτοὺς τὸ παυσόμενον, οὐκἦρκται πάντως τὸ μὴ παυσόμενον. τί τοίνυν ἀποφανοῦνταιπερὶ ψυχῆς, ἢ τῆς ἀγγελικῆς φύσεως; εἰ μὲν ἦρκται, καὶπαύσεται· εἰ δὲ οὐ παύσεται, δῆλον ὅτι κατ’ αὐτοὺς οὐδὲἦρκται. ἀλλὰ μὴν καὶ ἦρκται, καὶ οὐ παύσεται. οὐκ ἄραἦρκται κατ’ αὐτοὺς τὸ παυσόμενον. ὁ μὲν οὖν ἡμέτεροςλόγος· ὥσπερ ἵππου, καὶ βοός, καὶ ἀνθρώπου, καὶ ἑκάστουτῶν ὑπὸ τὸ αὐτὸ εἶδος, εἷς λόγος ἐστί, καὶ ὂ μὲν ἂνμετέχῃ τοῦ λόγου, τοῦτο καὶ κυρίως λέγεσθαι, ὃ δ’ ἂν μὴμετέχῃ, τοῦτο ἢ μὴ λέγεσθαι, ἢ μὴ κυρίως λέγεσθαι, οὕτωδὲ καὶ θεοῦ μίαν οὐσίαν εἶναι, καὶ φύσιν, καὶ κλῆσιν, κἂν13. 4 εἰ ’δε πέπαυται df || 15 λογος] ὄρος ’tres Colb.’ II 16 om καὶ c17 μὴ λέγεσθαι] μηδὲ λ. df1. τῶν ἀφύκτων] i.e. which theyconsider to be so.3. καί ποτε παύσεται] ‘and someday He will stop,’ viz. when τελείαἡ γέννησις. This is more pointedthan to make πότε interrogative.6. π,ρὸ πάντων β.] Prov. viii 25.9. ἀποφανοῦνται] ’will they shewto be the case.’12. οὐκἄραἢρκται κ.αὐτοὐςτὸπ.]Therefore the thing which zuill oneday stop can never according to themhave had a beginning.’ So Gr. turnstheir logic against them.13. ὁ μὲν οὖν ἠμ’. λ.] sc. λέγει.15. εἷς λόγος ἐστί] ’one ’ or‘principle of existence’; and so, fromthe observer’s point of view, ‘definition.’What is implied may be seenby the corresponding words in theapodosis, οὐσίαν κ. φύσιν κ. κλῆσιν.The meaning is not the same as in ὁἡμέτερος λ. just before, nor has it anyrelation to λέγεσθαι directly after.ib. ὃ μὲν ἂν μετέχῃ τ. λ.] ‘what.ever shares that characteristic principle,is rightly called by that name.’Tοῦτο, however, is grammaticallythe subject of λῆ., not the predicate.17. οὕτω δέ] The ‘apodotic’ forceof δέ is well known. It recurs againin the next section.ἐπινοίαις τισὶ διαιρουμέναις συνδιαιρῆται καὶ τὰ ὀνόματα.καὶ ὃ μὲν ἂν κυρίως λέγηται, τοῦτο καὶ εἶναι θεόν· ὃ δ’ ἂνἦ κατὰ φύσιν, τοῦτο καὶ ἀληθῶς ὀνομάζεσθαι· εἴπερ μὴἐν ὀνόμασιν, ἀλλ’ ἐν πράγμασίν ἐστιν ἡμῖν ἢ ἀλήθεια. οἱδέ, ὥσπερ δεδοικότες μὴ πάντα κινεῖν κατὰ τῆς ἀληθείας,θεὸν μὲν εἶναι τὸν υἱὸν ὁμολογοῦσιν, ὅταν βιασθῶσι τῶλόγῳ καὶ ταῖς μαρτυρίαις, ὁμώνυμον δὲ καὶ μόνης κοινω-νοῦντα τῆς κλήσεως.Ὅταν δὲ ἀνθυποφέρωμεν αὐτοῖς· τί οὖν; οὐκυρίως θεὸς ὁ υἱός, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ ζῷον τὸ γεγραμμένον; πῶςοὖν θεός, εἰ μὴ κυρίως θεός; τί γὰρ κωλύει, φασί, καὶὁμώνυμα ταῦτα εἶναι, καὶ κυρίως ἀμφότερα λέγεσθαι; καὶπροοίσουσιν ἡμῖν τὸν κύνα, τὸν χερσαῖον, καὶ τὸν θαλάτ-τιον, ὁμώνυμά τε ὄντα, καὶ κυρίως λεγόμενα, — ἔστι γάρ τικαὶ τοιοῦτον εἶδος ἐν τοῖς ὁμωνύμοις, — καὶ εἴτε τι ἄλλο τῇ4 ἥμιν ἐστιν f 14. 3 προσοίσουσιν bedef1. κἂν ἐπινοίαις τισι] The distinctive’notions’ which Gr. has inview are, of course, those of givingand of receiving life, of ‘proceeding ’and its correlative. They are not,however, to be considered as merelysubjective distinctions drawn byus, any more than the distinctionswhich we draw between one manand another. Td ὀνόματα, sc. πατήρ,υἱός, πνεῦμα.2. ὃ μὲν ἂν κ. λέγηται] sc. θεός.This seems hardly necessary to say;but it lends a kind of fulness to thefollowing statement, ὃ δ’ ἃν ἢ κατὰφύσιν θεός), τοῦτο κ. ἅλ’. ὀνομάζεσθαιθεόν). The ὀνομάζεσθαι = λέγεσθαι,and has nothing to do with the ὀνόματαabove.4. οἱ δέ] While names are not ofmuch importance, so long as we getthe facts right, they, the Eunomians,when pressed, will use the name ofθεός to describe the Son, but explainit to have no foundation in fact.7. ταῖς μαρτυρίαις] ’’testimoniesof Scripture.’ Cp v 2 29.ib. ὁμώνυμον] ‘in an equivocalsense.’ Ὁμώνυμα are in logicwhich bear the same name but indifferent senses.14. ’ The word God,’ they’is an aequivocum; it is used todenote two things which are essehtiallydifferent, as dig, for example,denotes both α beast and α ’ Ah,but in the one case there is no differencein dignity between the two thingswhich bear the same name; in theother, if your theory were true, twobeings would bear the same namewhich cotild not be even distantlycompared.12. ὁμ. ταῦτα εἶναι] The neut.used, as in the preceding section, toavoid the irreverence of a directreference to the Divine Persons.13. τὸν κύνα] the name of a fish,as well as of the beast. Both fishand beast are quite properly called’dog,’ but not in the same sense.15. τοιοῦτον εἶδος] ’such a class’;namely, ὁμώνυμα both of which’properly’ bear the common name.αὐτῇ προσχρῆται προσηγορίᾳ, καὶ μετέχει ταύτης ἐπ’ ἴσης,τῇ φύσει διεστηκός. ἀλλ’ ἐκεῖ μέν, ὦ βέλτιστε, δύο φύσειςτιθεὶς ὑπὸ τὴν αὐτὴν προσηγορίαν, οὐδὲν ἀμείνω τὴν ἑτέραντῆς ἑτέρας εἰσάγεις, οὐδὲ τὴν μὲν πρότερον, τὴν δὲ ὕστερον,οὐδὲ τὴν μὲν μᾶλλον, τὴν δὲ ἧττον οὖσαν τοῦθ’ ὅπερλέγεται. οὐδὲ γάρ τι συνέζευκται τὸ ταύτην παρέχοναὐταῖς τὴν ἀνάγκην. οὐ γὰρ ὁ μὲν μᾶλλον κύων, ὁ δὲἧττον τοῦ ἑτέρου κυνός, οἷον ὁ θαλάττιος τοῦ χερσαίου,ἢ ὁ χερσαῖος ἔμπαλιν τοῦ θαλαττίου· διὰ τί γάρ, ἢ κατὰτίνα λόγον; ἀλλ’ ἐν ὁμοτίμοις πράγμασι καὶ διαφόροιςἡ κοινωνία τῆς κλήσεως. ἐνταῦθα δὲ τῷ θεῷ παραζευγνὺςτὸ σεβάσμιον, καὶ τὸ ὑπὲρ πᾶσαν οὐσίαν εἶναι καὶ φύσιν,ὂ μόνου θεοῦ καὶ οἱονεὶ φύσις θεότητος, εἶτα τῷ πατρὶ μὲντοῦτο διδούς, τὸν υἱὸν δὲ ἀποστερῶν καὶ ὑποτιθείς, καὶ τὰδεύτερα νέμων αὐτῷ τῆς τιμῆς καὶ τῆς προσκυνήσεως, κἂνταῖς συλλαβαῖς χαρίζῃ τὸ ὅμοιον, τῷ πράγματι τὴν θεότηταπερικόπτεις, καὶ μεταβαίνεις κακούργως ἀπὸ τῆς τὸ ἴσονἐχούσης ὁμωνυμίας ἐπὶ τὴν τὰ μὴ ἴσα συνδέουσαν· ὥστεὁ γραπτός σοι καὶ ὁ ζῶν ἄνθρωπος μᾶλλον ἢ οἱ τοῦ13 οιονει] οἶον a ΙΙ 17 μεταβαίνεις] ης (non ῃς) a: ει d12. δύο φύσεις] perh. ‘two kindsof animals.’4. πρότερον...ὕστερον] as well asμᾶλλον and ἦττον, qualify οὖσαν τοῦθ’ὄπ. λέγ’.6. οὐδὲ γάρ τι σ.] ’for there isnothing attached to the name whichforces such distinctions upon ’There is nothing in the name ’dog’to make you care to enquire whetherthe beast or the fish was the first tobear it, or whether the beast is moreof a dog than the fish: the oneof ’dog’ is for all practical purposesas good as the other. The commonname is borne by creatures which,though different from each other,are equals.11. ἐνταῦθα δέ] ’ But whencome to the case in point, you attachto God an awful solemnity, and saythat He is too high to be described ashaving any essence or nature, — athingwhich belongs to none but God andconstitutes as it were the nature ofthe Godhead; and you give this tothe Father, but take it away from theSon, and make a subject of Him.’17. περικόπτεις] ‘mutitate.’ib. τῆς τὸ 1. ἐχ’. ὁμων.] such asthat of the different ’dogs.’19. ὁ γραπτός σ. κ. ὁ ζῶν ἆ] Thereal man and the picture of a man(either of which is spoken of as ’aman’) illustrate more nearly such aGodhead as the Eunomians speakof than the two kinds of ’dogs.’The picture is not further from beinga real man than the Son is frombeing really God, if the Eunomianaccount is correct; and at the sametime it bears externally a greaterresemblance to its original.ὑποδείγματος κύνες τῇ θεότητι πλησιάζουσιν. ἢ δὸς ἀμ-φοτέροις, ὥσπερ τὴν κοινωνίαν τῆς κλήσεως, οὕτω δὲ καὶτὴν ὁμοτιμίαν τῶν φύσεων, εἰ καὶ διαφόρους ταύτας εἰσάγεις·καὶ καταλέλυκάς σου τοὺς κύνας, οὓς ἐξηῦρες κατὰτῆς ἀνισότητος. τί γὰρ ὄφελος τῆς ὁμωνυμίας, εἰ τὸἰσότιμον ἔχοιεν οἱ παρά σου διαιρούμενοι; οὐ γὰρ ἵναἰσότιμα δείξῃς, ἁλλ’ ἵνα ἀνισότιμα, πρὸς τὴν ὁμωνυμίανκαὶ τοὺς κύνας κατέφυγες. πῶς ἄν τις ἐλεγχθείη μᾶλλονκαὶ ἑαυτῷ μαχόμενος καὶ θεότητι;Ἐὰν δὲ λεγόντων ἡμῶν, ὅτι τῷ αἰτίῳ μείζων ὁπατὴρ τοῦ υἱοῦ, προσλαβόντες τὴν Τὰ δὲ αἴτιον φύσει3 τῶν φύσεων] τῆς φύσεως ’nonnul.’ || 6 ἰσότιμον] + μὴ bedef15. 11 om ’δε b ’nonnul.’1. ἢ δός] Otherwise, — if thechasm between the two Personsbearing the name of God is not, onyour theory, as vast as I have indicated,suppose you admit that theequivocal name is in this instanceapplied to two natures of equalsplendour. You shall call themdifferent natures, if you like; butadmit that they are equal. What isthe result? You are no longer satisfiedwith your illustration of thedogs. You invented it to justify aninsinuation of inequality. The κατὰin κατὰ τῆς ἀνισ. appears to be usedas in the phrase τοξεύειν κατὰ σκοποῦ,of the point aimed at.5. εἰ τὸ ἴσ’. ἔχοιεν] It requiresgreat ingenuity to extract any meaningfrom the sentence, in relationto the context, if the reading μὴἔχ. is adopted. The μὴ was evidentlyintroduced by copyists whothought that Gr. was making astatement of his own belief, whichwas that the name θεός is applied inprecisely the same sense to Fatherand Son. But this ignores Gr.'sargument, — and, it may he added,the meaning of ὁμωνυμία. Gr.'simmediate purpose is to shew thatthe Eunomian illustration is, fromtheir own point of view, ill-chosen.To be of any service to them, theirinstance of ’equivocation’ shouldhave been one where the same nameis applied to two objects of verydifferent value.15.‘You admit,’ they say, ‘thatthe Father is greater than the Son,inasmuch ἃς He is the author of theSon's being; but since He ἲς bynature author of the ’s being, itfollows that He is by nature greaterthan the ’ The fallacy of theargument, Gr. annoers, lies in this,—that they attribute to the underlyingessence what is predicated ofthe particular possessor of that essence.It is like arguing that because so andso is a dead man, therefore man isdead.10. τῷ αἰτίῳ μ.] lby virtue of beingthe cause of His existence.11. προσλαβόντες τὴν . . . πρότασιν]‘taking ὂν their minor premiss.Πρότασις is the tehnical word for a‘premiss’; the πρός in προσλ. denotesthat this is a second (or minor) premiss.πρότασιν, ἔπειτα τὸ Μεῖζον τῆ φύσει συνάγωσιν· οὐκοἶδα πότερον ἑαυτοὺς παραλογίζονται, ἢ τοὺς πρὸς οὓς ὁλόγος. οὐ γὰρ ἁπλῶς ὅσα κατά τινος λέγεται, ταῦτα καὶκατὰ τοῦ ὑποκειμένου τούτῳ ῥηθήσεται· ἀλλὰ δῆλον κατὰτίνος, καὶ τίνα. ἐπεὶ τί κωλύει κἀμὲ ταύτην πρότασινποιησάμενον τήν, ὅτι ὁ πατὴρ μείζων τῇ φύσει, ἔπειταπροσλαβόντα τὸ Φύσει δὲ οὐ πάντως μείζων οὐδὲ πατήρ,ἐντεῦθεν συναγαγεῖν τὸ Μεῖζον οὐ πάντως μεῖζον· ἤ, Ὁ1. συνάγωσιν] ‘conclude.’ TheEunomian syllogism is this: ’TheFather is greater than the Son inasmuchas the Son owes His existenceto Him. But the giving of existenceto the Son belongs to the Father bynature. Therefore the Father isgreater than the Son by nature.’3. οὐ γὰρ ἁπλῶς κτλ.] Thereply is that not everything whichis predicated of a particular thing(e.g. of Socrates) is predicated of thenature which underlies that thing(in the example chosen, human nature).Everyone recognises whatthe statements are intended toapply to, and how they apply. So,what we say of the Father does notnecessarily apply to the DivineEssence which belongs to Him;some things apply to Him as Father,not as God.4. κατὰ τίνος, καὶ τίνα] Thewords are interrogative; if Gr. hadintended the indef. pron., he musthave said δ. ὅτι κ. τ. It seemsnecessary to understand κατὰ againbefore τίνα, ’in regard to what’ — i.e. in regard to nature, orto individuality, or what. To takethe example given by Gr. at the endof the section, if I say that Socratesis a dead man, it is plain that I amspeaking of Socrates in particularand of no one else, and that I amspeaking of Socrates in relation tothe bodily life, not about his soul,nor about his influence.5. τί κωλύει κἀμέ] Two can playat that game, Gr. says. He too candraw that kind of conclusion, andthey shall see whether it will hold.He makes a major premiss of thatconclusion of theirs, ’The father isby nature greater than the ’(We need not suppose that Gr. isfor the moment speaking of God:the words would suit any father andson.) The minor premiss is, ’Buthe is not by nature necessarily greater,or necessarily ’ So far thereis no absurdity. He need never havehad a son; there might have beennothing else to compare him with.(Gr., 1 repeat, is not speaking ofGod.) The right conclusion wouldbe that the ’s ’natural’ superiorityover his son consists solely inhis fatherhood, and not in his nature,—in his relationship, and notin that which he is when consideredapart by himself. But the false conclusionwhich Gr. draws, to illustratethe false conclusions of theEunomians, is this: ’Therefore thegreater is not necessarily greater, ’ or‘The father is not necessarily father.’It will be observed that Gr. saysμεῖζον, not 6 μείζων, which makes itclearer that the proposition is intendedto be quite general: Ἁ thingwhich is greater than another neednot be greater, but might be at thesame time equal or less; a fatherneed not be his ’s father, butmight be his brother or his son.’The second paralogism ὁ θεὸς οὐπάντως θεός) helps to shew that thisis Gr.'s meaning.πατὴρ οὐ πάντως πατήρ. εἰ βούλει δὲ οὕτως· ὁ θεόςοὐσία· ἡ οὐσία δέ, οὐ πάντως θεός· τὸ ἑξῆς αὐτὸς συνάγαγε·ὁ θεός, οὐ πάντως θεός. ἀλλ’ οἶμαι, παρὰ τὸ πῇ καὶἁπλῶς ὁ παραλογισμὸς οὗτος, ὡς τοῖς περὶ ταῦτα τεχνολογεῖνσύνηθες. ἡμῶν γὰρ τὸ μεῖζον τῇ τοῦ αἰτίου φύσειδιδόντων, αὐτοὶ τὸ τῇ φύσει μεῖζον ἐπάγουσιν· ὥσπερ ἂνεἰ καὶ λεγόντων ἡμῶν, ὅτι ὁ δεῖνα νεκρὸς ἄνθρωπος, ἁπλῶςἐπῆγον αὐτοὶ τὸν ἄνθρωπον.Ἐκεῖνο δὲ πῶς παραδράμωμεν, οὐδενὸς ἧττον τῶνεἰρημένων ὂν ἀξιάγαστον; ‘Ο πατήρ, φησιν, οὐσίας, ἢἐνεργείας ὄνομα; ὡς ἀμφοτέρωθεν ἡμᾶς δήσοντες, — εἰ μὲνοὐσίας φήσομεν, συνθησομένους ἑτεροούσιον εἶναι τὸν υἱόν,ἐπειδὴ μία μὲν οὐσία θεοῦ, ταύτην δέ, ὡς οὗτοι, προκατείληφεςὁ πατήρ· εἰ δὲ ἐνεργείας, ποίημα σαφῶς ὁμολογή-2 σύναγε cdefg ’duo Reg. Or. 1’|| 3 πάρα τὸ πη] παρατροπὴν (om και)b: παρατροπῇ ‘Reg. a’3. παρὰ τὸ πῆ κ. ἁπλῶς] ’Thefallacy lies in arguing from the conditionedto the absolute’ (lit. ’is onaccount of that which is so for specialreasons and that which is so absolutely’).4. τοῖς περὶ ταῦτα] ’to use thetechnical language of logicians’ (lit.’as it is customary to speak technicallyfor those who concern themselveswith these’).5. ἡμῶν γὰρ κτλ.] ’For whenwe allow that it is in the nature of acause to be greater than the thingcaused, they infer that it is greaterby nature; which is like arguingthat because we say, "Such and sucha man is dead." therefore man, inthe abstract, is ’ The emphasis,of course, is on ὁ δεῖνα, and itseems simplest to take ἄνθρ. alongwith it as subject, understandingνεκρός alone to be predicate — anarrangement of words like ὁ μέγαςτέθνηκε Βασίλειος. But the sense isthe Same either way. In the apodosis,τὸν ἄνθρ. is subject, the predicatebeing supplied from the previousclause, sc. νεκρὸν εἶναι. Thecommentators from Elias onwardshave totally failed to catch the argument,or even to understand thegrammar of the passage. If Gr. hadintended to say anything so pointlessas Petavius (de Trin. II v 12)makes out, viz. that because ὁ δεῖναis a dead man, therefore he is a man,he must have said τὸ ἄνθρωπον, notτόν. So far Elias, whom Petaviusquotes, knew better.16. ’ Well? they say, ’the wordFather must denote either nature oroperation: which is it to be?’ Neither,is the answer; it denotes a relation,and α relation which impliescommunity of nature between theFather and the Son.10. ἀξιάγαστον] ‘astonishing,’from ἄγαμαι ’to wonder.ib. οὐσίας, ἢ ἐνεργ. ὄν.] ’is it aname denoting essence, or operation?’12. ἑτεροούσιον] A word modelledon the false analogy of ὁμοούσιος. Itshould be ἐτερούσιος.σοντας, ἁλλ’ οὐ γέννημα. οὗ γὰρ ὁ ἐνεργῶν, ἐκεῖ πάντωςκαὶ τὸ ἐνεργούμενον. καὶ πῶς τῷ πεποιηκότι ταὐτὸν τὸπεποιημένον, θαυμάζειν φήσουσι. σφόδρα ἂν ᾐδέσθηνὑμῶν καὶ αὐτὸς τὴν διαίρεσιν, εἰ τῶν δύο τὸ ἕτερον δέξασθαιἢν ἀναγκαῖον, ἁλλὰ μὴ τὰ δύο διαφυγόντα τρίτον εἰπεῖνἀληθέστερον· ὅτι οὔτε οὐσίας ὄνομα ὁ πατήρ, ὦ σοφώτατοι,οὔτε ἐνεργείας, σχέσεως δὲ καὶ τοῦ πῶς ἔχει πρὸς τὸνυἱὸν ὁ πατήρ, ἢ ὁ υἱὸς πρὸς τὸν πατέρα. ὡς γὰρ παρ’ἡμῖν αἱ κλήσεις αὗται τὸ γνήσιον καὶ οἰκεῖον γνωρίζουσιν,οὕτω κἀκεῖ τὴν τοῦ γεγεννημένου πρὸς τὸ γεγεννηκὸςὁμοφυίαν σημαίνουσιν. ἔστω δέ, ὑμῶν χάριν, καὶ οὐσίατις ὁ πατήρ· συνεισάξει τὸν υἱόν, οὐκ ἀλλοτριώσει, κατὰτὰς κοινὰς ἐννοίας καὶ τὴν τῶν κλήσεων τούτων δύναμιν.ἔστω καὶ ἐνεργείας,εἰ τοῦτο δοκεῖ· οὐδὲ οὕτως ἡμᾶς αἱρήσετε.αὐτὸ δὲ τοῦτο ἐνηργηκὼς ἂν εἴη τὸ ὁμοούσιον, εἰ καὶ ἄτοποςἄλλως ἡ τῆς περὶ τοῦτο ἐνεργείας ὑπόληψις. ὁρᾶς ὅπωςὑμῶν, καὶ κακομαχεῖν ἐθελόντων, τὰς στροφὰς διαφεύγομεν;ἐπεὶ δέ σου τὸ ἐν τοῖς λογισμοῖς καὶ ταῖς στροφαῖς ἄμαχον16. 5 διαφυγόντα] φυγόντα b || 11 οὐσία] οὐσίας e ‘Reg. Cypr. ||14 αἱρήσετε] σητεb·. σεται d || 15 ’δε] γὰρ ’Reg. Cypr. aliiq. Reg. etColb.’ || 16 ἄλλως] + πὼς df || πέρι] πρὸς b || 17 om καὶ bc1. οὗ γὰρ ὁ ἐνεργῶν] lit. ’wherethere is one performing an operation,there is also the result of the operation.’It is not very obvious whyγέννησις should not be includedunder the head of ἐνέργεια, and Gr.does not much object to it. Butevidently Gr. ’s opponent made ἐνεργεῖν= ποιεῖν.3. ᾐδέσθην] iron. ‘I should havestood in great ’awe.’7. σχέσεως] ’relation’’, explainedby τοῦ πῶς ὦι πρός κτλ.10 κὰκεῖ when used in ref. tothe Godhead.12. συνεισάξει] ’will at the samemoment imply the Son.’15. αὐτὸδἐ τοῦτο] ’His operationwill still have produced that veryresult consubstantial with Himself.’ib. εἰ καἰ ἄτοπος] The καὶbe taken closely with ἄτοπος anddisjoined from εἰ, which has here theforce of ’since.’ The reading ἢ,adopted by the Benedictines, makesἄλλως superfluous. The notion ofsuch an operation as results in aSon’ would be absurd if it did notimply a real (i.e. a consubstantial)Son.17. κακομαχεῖν] ‘to fight unscrupulously:The word στροφάς,’twists,’ shews that the μάχη is awrestling-match, not a battle.ἔγνωμεν, ἴδωμέν σου καὶ τὴν ἐκ τῶν θείων λογίων ἰσχύν,ἃν ἄρα δέξῃ κἀντεῦθεν πείθειν ἡμᾶς.Ἡμεῖς μὲν γὰρ ἐκ μεγάλων καὶ ὑψηλῶν τῶντοῦ υἱοῦ τὴν θεότητα καὶ κατειλήφαμεν, καὶ κηρύσφωνῶνσομεν. τίνων τούτων; τῆς θεός, τῆς λόγος, ὁ ἐν ἀρχῇ,ὁ μετὰ τῆς ἀρχῆς, ἡ ἀρχή· Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ὁ λόγος, καὶ ὁ λόγοςἦν πρὸς τὸν θεόν, καὶ θεὸς ἦν ὁ λόγος· καί, Μετά σου ἡἀρχή· καί, ‘Ο καλῶν αὐτὴν ἀπὸ γενεῶν ἀρχήν. ἐπειδὴυἱὸς μονογενής· ‘Ο μονογενὴς υἱός, ὁ ὢν εἰς τὸν κόλπον τοῦπατρός, ἐκεῖνος ἐξηγήσατο. ὁδός, ἁλήθεια, ζωή, φῶς· Ἐγώεἰμι ἡ ὁδός, καὶ ἡ ἁλήθεια, καὶ ἡ ζωή· καί, Ἐγώ εἰμι τὸφῶς τοῦ κόσμου. σοφία, δύναμις· Χριστὸς θεοῦ δύναμις,καὶ θεοῦ σοφία. ἀπαύγασμα, χαρακτήρ, εἰκών, σφραγίς·Ὅς ὣν ἀπαύγασμα τῆς δόξης καὶ χαρακτὴρ τῆς ὑποστάσεωςαὐτοῦ· καί, Εἰκὼν τῆς ἀγαθότητος· καί, τοῦτονγὰρ ὁ πατὴρ ἐσφράγισεν ὁ θεός. κύριος, βασιλεύς, ὁ ὤν,ὁ παντοκράτωρ· Ἔβρεξε κύριος πῦρ παρὰ κυρίου· καί,17. 4 καὶ κατειλ.] om καὶ e ΙΙ 16 om ο πατὴρ ce2. δέξη κἀντ’. πείθειν] ‘if fromthat quarter you can find means topersuade tis?17. The titles given to the Son inScripture clearly shew His Godhead.5. τῆς θεός] sc. φωνῆς.6. ἐν ἀρχῇ ἢν] John i 1.7. μετὰ σοῦ ἡ ἁ.] Ps. cix (ex) 3where Swete reads μ. σοῦ ἀρχή. Asthe Ps. addresses Christ, the statementagrees with Gr.'s allusion tothe passage just above; for if theἀρχή (sc. the Father) is with Him,He is with the ἀρχή. In the Ps.the word ἀρχή was prob. intendedto mean ‘rule.’ ‘authority,’ not (asGr. seems to think) ‘beginning.’8. ὁ καλῶν αὐτήν] Is. xli 4 wherethe true text is ἀπὸ γενεῶν ἀρχῆς,the αὐτήν prob. being repeated fromthe δικαιοσύνην of the previous vs.I cannot find that any other fatheruses the text in the same manner asGr.ib. ἐπειδὴ υἱὸς μ.] gives a justificationfor the text just used, — orperhaps for the orig. statement τὴνθεότητα...κηρύσσομεν. The verbἐστίν, or καλεῖται, must be supplied:’for He is the only begotten Son.’9. ὁ μονογ. υἱός] John i 18. HortTwo Dissertations p. 20 mentionsthat the phrase μονογενὴς θεός isonce used by Gr. (Ep. 202 p. 168 C).It seems, however, from our presentpassage that Gr. considered υἱός tobe the right reading in St John.10. ἐγώ εἰμι ἢ ὁδ.] John xiv 6.11. τὸ φῶς τ. κόσμου] John viii12.12. X. θεοῦ δύν.] 1 Cor. i 24.14. ὃς ὢν ἀπαύγασμα] Hob. i 3.15. εἰκὼν τῆς ἂγ.] Wisd. vii 26.ib. τοῦτον γὰρ b π. ἐσφρ.] Johnvi 27.17. ἔβρεξε κύριος] Gen. xix 24.Ῥάβδος εὐθύτητος ἡ ῥάβδος τῆς βασιλείας σου· καί, ‘O ὤν,καὶ ὁ ἢν, καὶ ὁ ἐρχόμενος, καὶ ὁ παντοκράτωρ. σαφῶςπερὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ λεγόμενα, καὶ ὅσα τῆς αὐτῆς τούτοις ἐστὶδυνάμεως ὧν οὐδὲν ἐπίκτητον, οὐδὲ ὕστερον τῷ υἱῷ προσ-γενόμενον, ἢ τῷ πνεύματι, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ αὐτῷ τῷ πατρί.οὐ γὰρ ἐκ προσθήκης τὸ τέλειον. οὐ γὰρ ἦν ὅτε ἄλογοςἦν, οὐδὲ ἦν ὅτε οὐ πατήρ, οὐδὲ ἦν ὅτε οὐκ ἀληθής, ἢἄσοφος, ἢ ἀδύνατος, ἢ ζωῆς ἐνδεής, ἢ λαμπρότητος, ἢἀγαθότητος.Σὺ δέ μοι καταρίθμει πρὸς ταῦτα τὰ τῆς ἀγνωμοσύνηςῥήματα, τὸ θεός μου καὶ θεὸς ὑμῶν, τὸ μείζων, τὸἔκτισε, τὸ ἐποίησε, τὸ ἡγίασεν. εἰ βούλει δέ, καὶ τὸ δοῦλον,καὶ τὸ ὑπήκοον· τὸ δέδωκε, τὸ ἔμαθε, τὸ ἐντέταλται, τὸἀπέσταλται, τὸ μὴ δύνασθαι ἀφ’ ἑαυτοῦ τι ποιεῖν, ἢ λέγειν,ἢ κρίνειν, ἢ δωρεῖσθαι, ἢ βούλεσθαι. ἔτι δὲ καὶ ταῦτα,τὴν ἄγνοιαν, τὴν ὑποταγήν, τὴν εὐχήν, τὴν ἐρώτησιν, τὴν18. 13 ἐντέταλται] ἐντέταλκεν b1. ῥάβδος εὖθ’.] Ps. xliv 7 (xlv6); Heb. i 8.ib. ὁ ὢν κ. ὁ ἦν] Rev. i 4, 8; iv8; xi 17; xvi 5. In all these placesSt J. seems to use the expression tomean the Father.6. οὐ γὰρ ἐκ προσθήκης] TheFather's perfection would be the consequenceof an addition, if He hadat one time been without the Son.The words which follow, ἄλογοςκτλ., are all chosen with ref. to oneor other of the titles of the Sonabove cited.18. The htimbler language usedconcerning Him belongs to the humannature zvhich He assumed.10. τὰ τῆς ἅγν’. ῥήματα] Theshade of meaning which Gr. intendedἅγν’. here to bear may be gatheredfrom ὁ νῦν σοι καταφρονούμενος in§ 19; ’the words which you scornfullymisunderstand.’11. θεός μου] John xx 17.ib. μείζων] John xiv 28.12. ἔκτισε] Prov. viii 22.12. ἐποίησε] Acts ii 36, Heb. iii 2.ib. ἡγίασεν] John x 36.ib. δοῦλον] Phil, ii 7.13. ὑπήκοον] Phil, ii 8.ib. δέδωκε] The passage in Ath.Or. iii c. Ar. ἑ 35 suggests John iii35, but the context here may pointto John xviii 11.ib. ἔμαθε] Heb. v 8.ib. ἐντέταλται] There seems tobe no passage where the actual wordoccurs in relation to Christ, nor ἐντέταλκενeither. The ref. is prob.to John xv 10 and similar passages.14. ἀπέσταλται] John v 36, xx 21.ib. μὴ δύνασθαι...ποιεῖν] Johnv 19.ib. λέγειν] John viii 28, xii 49.15. κρίνειν] John viii 15, xii 47.ib. δωρεῖσθαι] Matt, xx 23.ib. βούλεσθαι] John v 30.16. ἄγνοιαν] Mark xiii 32.ib. ὑπ’ ὁτ’ ἂγ ἤν] Luke ii 51, 1 Cor.xv 28.ib. εὐχήν] Luke iii 21 etc.ib. ἐρώτησιν] From the examplegiven in § 20, it seems that Gr.refers to occasions like John xinot to John xiv 16, which wouldbe little more than a repetition ofεὺχήν.προκοπήν, τὴν τελείωσιν. πρόσθες, εἰ βούλει, καὶ ὅσατούτων ταπεινότερα, τὸ ὕπνουν, τὸ πείνην, τὸ κοπιᾷν, τὸδακρύειν, τὸ ἀγωνιᾷν, τὸ ὑποδύεσθαι. τάχα δ’ ἂν ὀνειδίσαιςκαὶ τὸν σταυρόν, καὶ τὸν θάνατον. τὴν γὰρ ἔγερσιν καὶτὴν ἀνάληψιν παρήσειν μοι δοκεῖς, ἐπειδή τι καὶ πρὸςἡμῶν ἐν τούτοις εὑρίσκεται. πολλὰ δ’ ἂν ἔτι πρὸς τούτοιςσπερμολογήσαις, εἰ βούλοιο συντιθέναι τὸν ὁμώνυμόν σουθεὸν καὶ παρέγγραπτον, ἡμῖν δὲ ἀληθινὸν καὶ ὁμότιμον.τούτων γὰρ ἕκαστον οὐ χαλεπὸν μὲν καὶ κατὰ μέροςἐπεξιόντα ἐξηγεῖσθαί σοι πρὸς τὸ εὐσεβέστατον, καὶἀνακαθαίρειν τὸ ἐν τοῖς γράμμασι πρόσκομμα, εἴ γεπροσπταίεις ὄντως, ἀλλὰ μὴ ἑκὼν κακουργεῖς. ἑνὶ δὲκεφαλαίῳ, τὰ μὲν ὑψηλότερα πρόσαγε τῇ θεότητι καὶ τῇκρείττονι φύσει παθῶν καὶ σώματος· τὰ δὲ ταπεινότερατῷ συνθέτῳ, καὶ τῷ διὰ σὲ κενωθέντι καὶ σαρκωθέντι,7 σου] σοι cdf || 8 ὁμότιμον] + τὼ πατρὶ bdf || 9 om οὐ e || 15 τὼ διασε] om τὼ c1. προκοπήν] Luke ii 52.ib. τελείωσιν] Luke xiii 32, Heb.ii 10 etc.2. ὑπνοῦν] Matt, viii 24.ib. πεινῆν] Matt, xxi 18 etc.ib. κοπιᾷν] John iv 6.3. δακρύειν] John xi 35.ib. ἀγωνιᾷν] Luke xxii 44.ib. ὑποδύεσθαι] ‘to slip away,’‘withdraw’; — a quite classical senseof the word. The ref. is prob. toJohn x 39.7. σπερμολογήσαις] ‘pick up,’like a bird gathering up seed: cp.Acts xvii 18.ib. συντιθέναι] ’to put togethervour equivocal God’; with ref. toargument of § 14.8. παρἐηραπτον] one whosename has been fraudulently put onthe list.ib. ὁμότιμον] The words τῷ πατρίare prob. only a gloss, though a correctone.9. κατὰ μόρος ἐπεξ. ἐξηγ.] ’to gothrough them in detail and give youa very religious interpretation of each,and to clear away the offence whicliyou find in the letter of Scripture.’14. παθῶν κ. σῶμ’.] governed byκρείττονι. The Benedictine editorscompare with this whole passageLeo Serm. 45 de Quadr. p. 228.See also his letter to Flavian § 4.15. τῷ συνθέτω The words whichfollow — τῷ κενωθέντι κτλ.— as wellas ἀσύνθετος in ξ 19, shew that Gr.does not mean ‘to the composite nature,’sc. the human nature composedof body and soul, but ‘to Himwho is composite, made up of two’ Or possibly, as die τῷ isrepealed, Gr. may have intended τῷσυνθέτῳ to be the dat. of τὸ σύνθετον,in the sense of ’the compositewhole,’ consisting of Godhead andmanhood. It would, of course,have been more exact to have saidτῆ διὰ σὲ κενώσει, or something ofthat kind; but it would have beenless vivid; and there was no fear ofany one supposing that Gr. meant byτῷ κενωθέντι a different person fromHim who had the κρείττω φύσιν.οὐδὲν δὲ χεῖρον εἰπεῖν, καὶ ἀνθρωπισθέντι, εἶτα καὶ ὑψω-θέντι, ἵνα σὺ τὸ τῶν δογμάτων σου σαρκικὸν καὶ χαμαιπετὲςκαταλύσας μάθης ὑψηλότερος εἶναι, καὶ συνανιέναιθεότητι, καὶ μὴ τοῖς ὁρωμένοις ἐναπομένοις, ἀλλὰ συν-ἐπαίρῃ τοῖς νοουμένοις, καὶ γινώσκῃς, τίς μὲν φύσεωςλόγος, τίς δὲ λόγος οἰκονομίας.Οὗτος γὰρ ὁ νῦν σοι καταφρονούμενος, ἦν ὅτε καὶὑπὲρ σὲ ἦν· ὁ νῦν ἄνθρωπος καὶ ἀσύνθετος ἦν. ὃ μὲν ἦν,διέμεινεν· ὃ δὲ οὐκ ἦν, προσέλαβεν. ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ἀναιτίως·τίς γὰρ αἰτία θεοῦ; ἀλλὰ καὶ ὕστερον γέγονε δι’ αἰτίανἡ δὲ ἦν τὸ σὲ σωθῆναι τὸν ὑβριστήν, ὃς διὰ τοῦτο περιφρονεῖςθεότητα, ὅτι τὴν σὴν παχύτητα κατεδέξατο) διὰ2 χαμαιπετὲς] χαμερπὲς bef || 4 εναπομενης c3. συνανιέναι θ.] ’to move upwards— or perh. to grow up — with’ The words do not necessarilyimply that θεότης ἄνεισι,and there is no ref. to the Ascension.4. ἐναπομένοις] Ἐναπομένειν is‘to remain on, to remain to the end,in.’5. φύσεως λόγος] ’what is thelaw of His (true, Divine) Nature.’6. οἰκονομίας] of accommodationto our circumstances. The word isvery freq. used by the fathers inref. to the Incarnation: see Suicers.υ., and Sophocles' Lexicon.19. He was not always, whatHe became for our sakes; and Heever retained the nature which wasoriginally His. The words whichindicate His self-emptying are alwaysbalanced by others which indicate Hisdivine glory.7. καὶ ὑπὲρ σε] ‘even abpve you.’8. ὃ μὲν ἢν, διέμεινεν] Cp. ZenoVer. Serm. ii de Nat. saluo quoderat, meditatur esse quod non erat.St Austin plays upon the same formulain many of his Christmassermons. See also Leo Serm. xxide Nat. Dei § 2.9. ἀναιτίως] It appears like acontradiction of what Gr. has saidin ξξ 3. 15. But the sentenceswhich follow shew that Gr. is thinkinghere of αἰτία in the sense of afinal cause.10. γέγονε] as in the N.T. = ἐγένετο.12. διὰ μέ σου νοός] Cp. Or. ii 23θεὸς σαρκὶ διὰ μέσης ψυχῆς ἀνεκράθη,καὶ συνεδέθη τὰ διεστῶτα τῆ πρὸςἄμφω τοῦ μεσιτεύοντος οἰκειότητι. InOr. xxxviii, after shewing in § 10how creatures endowed with mindhave an affinity with God whichother creatm-es have not, Gr. saysin § 13 that the Eternal Word wasincarnate διὰ μέσης ψυχῆς νοερᾶςμεσιτευούσης θεότητι καὶ σαρκὸς παχύτητι.We cannot imagine an’incarnation ’ of the Word in anirrational thing.μέσου νοὸς ὁμιλήσας σαρκί, καὶ γενόμενος ἄνθρωπος, ὁκάτω θεός· ἐπειδὴ συνανεκράθη θεῷ, καὶ γέγονεν εἷς, τοῦκρείττονος ἐκνικήσαντος, ἵνα γένωμαι τοσοῦτον θεός, ὅσονἐκεῖνος ἄνθρωπος. ἐγεννήθη μέν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐγεγέννητο·ἐκ γυναικὸς μέν, ἀλλὰ καὶ παρθένου. τοῦτο ἀνθρώπινον,ἐκεῖνο θεῖον. ἀπάτωρ ἐντεῦθεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀμήτωρ ἐκεῖθεν.ὅλον τοῦτο θεότητος. ἐκυοφορήθη μέν, ἀλλ’ ἐγνώσθηπροφήτῃ καὶ αὐτῷ κυοφορουμένῳ, καὶ προσκιρτῶντι τοῦλόγου, ὃν ἐγένετο. ἐγένετο. ἐσπαργανώθη μέν, ἀλλ’ ἀποσπαρ-γανοῦται τὰ τῆς ταφῆς ἀνιστάμενος. ἐν φάτνῃ μὲν ἀνεκλίθη,ἀλλ’ ὑπ’ ἀγγέλων ἐδοξάσθη, καὶ ὑπ’ ἀστέρος ἐμηνύθη,καὶ ὑπὸ μάγων προσεκυνήθη. πῶς σὺ προσπταίεις τῷβλεπομένῳ, μὴ σκοπῶν τὸ νοούμενον; ἐφυγαδεύθη μὲν εἰς19. 2 συνανεκράθη] συνεκράθη b || 4 γεγέννητο c || 9 ἐγίνετο e ||10 ανεκλιθη] ἀνεκλήθη a: ἐτέθη b1. γενόμενος Ἴ’., ὁ κάτω θεός]‘was made man, the earthly God.’Gr. is fond of dwelling upon theintrinsic divinity of man. Cp. Or.xxxviii 7 ἵνα...ὡς οἰκείοις ἤδη προσομιλῇ. . . θεὸς ἑνούμενός τε καὶγνωριζόμενος. Here, the descriptionof man as ὁ κάτω θεός is preparedfor by the words διὰ μέσου νοός.2. συνανεκράθη θεῶ Cp. iv 2ἐχρίσθη θεότητι; iv 3 θεῷ πλακῆναικαἰ γεμέσθαι θεὸν ἐκ τῆς μίξεως. Thelanguage, if pressed, would implythat Christ was a human person,taken into union with a divine one.This would, of course, be erroneous,and Gr. 's own words immediatelybefore shew that he perfectly understoodthe Person of our Lord to bedivine first, and then by condescensionhuman. Prob. the nom. toσυνανεκράθη is strictly supplied fromἄνθρωπος, ὁ κ. θεός, not from ὁ νῦν σοικαταφρονούμενος. The humanity ofChrist undoubtedly συνανεκρ. θεῷ.Put the humanity of Christ, impersonalexcept by virtue of His assumptionof it, is not exactly describedby the term ἄνθρωπος. Therise of Nestorianism, which wasafter Gr.'s time, would have suggesedmore careful phraseology;and it may be added that a fear ofthe still later Eutychianism mighthave made Gr. modify the wordsσυνανεκράθη and τοῦ κρείττονος ἐκνικησαντος.3. ἵνα γένωμαι] It is perh. somewhatνεανικόν to speak of our becomingGods ‘to the same extent’as Christ is man; but doubtless Gr.would explain that he spoke of menin proportion to heir capacity; orperh., in view of what follows,τοσοῦτον means ’as truly.’ Heuses the same phrase in Or. xl45.4. ἐγεψννητο] ‘He had been begottenbefore,’ i.e. eternally.7. ὅλον τοῦτο] both the ἀπάτωρἐντ’. and the ἀμήτωρ ἐκ.ib. ἐγνώσθη προφ.] Luke i 41.9. ἀποσπαργανοῦται τὰ τῆς τ.]Luke xxiv 12, John xx 6 f.11. ὐπ’ ἀγγ. ἐδοξάσθη] Luke ii9 f.Αἴγυπτον, ἀλλὰ φυγαδεύει τὰ Αἰγυπτίων. οὐκ εἶχενεἶδος οὐδὲ κάλλος παρὰ Ἰουδαίοις, ἁλλὰ τῷ Δαβὶδ ὡραῖοςἦν κάλλει παρὰ τοὺς υἱοὺς τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τοῦὄρους ἀστράπτει, καὶ ἡλίου φωτοειδέστερος γίνεται, τὸμέλλον μυσταγωγῶν.Ἐβαπτίσθη μὲν ὡς ἄνθρωπος, ἀλλ’ ἁμαρτίαςἔλυσεν ὡς θεός· οὐ καθαρσίων αὐτὸς δεόμενος, ἀλλ’ ἵναἁγιάσῃ τὰ ὕδατα. ἐπειράσθη ὡς ἄνθρωπος, ἀλλ’ ἐνίκησενὡς θεός· ἀλλὰ θαρρεῖν διακελεύεται, ὡς κόσμον νενικηκώς.ἐπείνησεν, ἀλλ’ ἔθρεψε χιλιάδας, ἀλλ’ ἄρτος ἐστὶ ζωτικὸςκαὶ οὐράνιος. ἐδίψησεν, ἀλλ’ ἐβόησεν· Ἐάν τις δίψᾳ,ἐρχέσθω πρός με, καὶ πινέτω• ἀλλὰ καὶ πηγάζειν ὑπέσχετοτοὺς πιστεύοντας. ἐκοπίασεν, ἀλλὰ τῶν κοπιώντων καὶπεφορτισμένων ἐστὶν ἀνάπαυσις. ἐβαρήθη μὲν ὕπνῳ,ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ πελάγους κουφίζεται, ἁλλ’ ἐπιτιμᾷ πνεύμασιν,ἀλλὰ Πέτρον κουφίζει βαπτιζόμενον. δίδωσι τέλος, ἀλλ’ἐξ ἰχθύος, ἀλλὰ βασιλεύει τῶν ἀπαιτούντων. Σαμαρείτηςἀκούει καὶ δαιμονῶν, πλὴν σώζει τὸν ἀπὸ Ἰερουσαλὴμκαταβαίνοντα καὶ λῃσταῖς περιπεσόντα, πλὴν ὑπὸ δαι-1 ἐφυγάδευσε be: φυγαδευσε g 20. 7 om οὐ καθαρσίων αὐτὸς δεομενοςce || 14 ἐβαρήθη] ἐβαρύνθη cef1. φυγαδεύει τὰ Αἶγ’.] The ref.is to the legend that the idols ofEgypt were broken at His entranceinto the land; which legend connecteditself with such passages asIs. xix 16 f., Jer. xlvi 25.ib. οὐκ εἶχεν εἶδ’.] Is. liii 2.2. ὡραῖος] Ps. xliv 3 (xlv 2).3. ἐπὶ τοῦ ὄρους] Matt, xvii 2,Luke ix 29.4. τὸ μέλλον μυστ] ‘revealingthe secret of the future.’ Prob. tothe three Apostles, — the future beingHis own future.6. ἁμαρτίας ἔλυσεν] Matt, ix 2etc. It is, of course, not ὡς θεός thatour Lord there claims to forgive sins.7. ἵνα ἁγιάσῃ τὰ ὔ.] Cp. the ifirst prayer in the Baptismal Office.9. κόσμον νενικ.] John xvi 33.10. ἄρτος ἐστι] John vi 51.11. ἐάν τις διψῶ John vii 37.12. πηγάζειν] ‘give forth waterlike a fountain,’ John vii 38.14. ἀνάπαυσις] Matt, xi 28.15. ἐπὶ π. κουφίζεται] Matt, xiv25 f.ib. ἔπιτ’. πνεύμασιν] Matt, viii26.16. βαπτιζόμενον] a classical senseof the word.17. ἐξ ἰχθύος] Matt, xvii 27.id. Σαμαρείτης] John viii 48.18. τὸν ἀπὸ ‘Ι. καταβ.] Luke χ30; ‘the Good Samaritan.’19. ὑπὸ δαιμ. ἐπιγινώσκεται] Marki 24, 34 etc.μόνων ἐπιγινώσκεται, καὶ ἀπελαύνει δαίμονας, καὶ λεγεῶναπνευμάτων βυθίζει, καὶ ὡς ἀστραπὴν ὁρᾷ πίπτοντα τὸνἀρχηγὸν τῶν δαιμόνων. λιθάζεται, ἀλλ’ οὐχ ἁλίσκεται.προσεύχεται, ἀλλ’ ἐπακούει. δακρύει ἀλλὰ παύει δάκρυον.ἐρωτᾷ ποῦ Λάζαρος, ἄνθρωπος γὰρ ἦν· ἀλλ’ ἐγείρειΘεὸς θεὸς γὰρ ἦν. πωλεῖται, καὶ λίαν εὐώνως,τριάκοντα γὰρ ἀργυρίων, ἁλλ’ ἐξαγοράζει κόσμον, καὶμεγάλης τιμῆς, τοῦ ἰδίου γὰρ αἵματος. ὡς πρόβατον ἐπὶσφαγὴν ἄγεται, ἀλλὰ ποιμαίνει τὸν Ἰσραήλ, νῦν δὲ καὶπᾶσαν τὴν οἰκουμένην. ὡς ἀμνὸς ἄφωνος, ἁλλὰ λόγοςἐστί, φωνῇ βοῶντος ἐν τῆ ἐρήμῳ καταγγελλόμενος.μεμαλάκισται, τετραυμάτισται, ἀλλὰ θεραπεύει πᾶσαννόσον, καὶ πᾶσαν μαλακίαν. ἐπὶ τὸ ξύλον ἀνάγεται,προσπήγνυται, ἀλλὰ τῷ ξύλῳ τῆς ζωῆς ἀποκαθίστησιν,ἀλλὰ σώζει καὶ λῃστὴν συσταυρούμενον, ἀλλὰ σκοτίζειπᾶν τὸ ὁρώμενον. ὄξος ποτίζεται, χολὴν βρωματίζεται·τίς; ὁ τὸ ὕδωρ εἰς οἶνον μεταβαλών, ὁ τῆς πικρᾶς γεύσεωςκαταλύτης, ὁ γλυκασμὸς καὶ ὅλος ἐπιθυμία. παραδίδωσιτὴν ψυχήν, ἀλλ’ ἐξουσίαν ἔχει πάλιν λαβεῖν αὐτήν, ἁλλὰ1 λεγεῶνας df || 5 που] + τέθειται bdfg Ἴ’ 7 κοσμον] ’τον κ. eg ΙΙ 12 μεμαλακισταδ]+ καὶ bdefg1. λεγεῶνα] Mark v 9 etc.2. ὡς ἀστραπήν] Luke χ 18.3. λιθάζεται, ἀλλ’ οὐχ ἁ.] Johnviii 59.4. ἐπακούει] Matt, viii 3 etc.ib. παύει δάκρυον] Luke vii 13.5. ἐρωτιᾷ που] John xi 34. Cp.the discussion in Ath. Or. iii c. Ar.ἑ37, 38- See also μ’ Deer. Nic. §14.Ath. decides in favour of supposingthat our Lord knew the answer beforeasking the question; but headmits the possibility of the viewadopted by Gr. Ἃν δὲ φιλονεικῶσινἔτι διὰ τὸ ἐπερωτᾶν, ἀκουέτωσαν,ἐν μὲν τῆ θεότητι οὐκ ἐστιν ἄγνοια,τῆς δὲ σαρκὸς ἴδιόν ἐστι τὸ ἂγ νοεῖν.7. ἐξαγοράζει] 1 Cor. vi 20, vii23; cp. 1 Pet. i 19.8. πρόβατον] Is. liii 7.9. ποιμαίνει τ. ’I.] Ps. lxxix 2(lxxx Ι).ib. νῦν δέ] Ps. ii 9, Rev.xii 5.10. ἀμνὸς ἄφ’.] Is. liii 7.ib. λόγος κτλ.] John i 1, 23.12. μεμαλάκισται] Is liii 5.ib. θεραπεύει] Matt, ix 35.14. τῷ ξύλω τῆς ζ] Rev. xxii 2Gen. ii 9.15. λῃστήν] Luke xxiii 43.ib. σκοτίζει] Matt, xxvii 45.17. τὸ ὕδωρ] John ii 9.ib. τῆς πικρᾶς γ. κατ.] Εx. xv25.18. γλυκασμός] Cant. V 16.19. ἐξουσίαν ἐχ.] John x 18.καταπέτασμα ῥήγνυται, τὰ γὰρ ἄνω παραδείκνυται, ἀλλὰπέτραι σχίζονται, ἀλλὰ νεκροὶ προεγείρονται. ἀποθνήσκει,ζωοποιεῖ δέ, καὶ καταλύει τῷ θανάτῳ τὸν θάνατον. θά-πτεται, ἀλλ’ ἀνίσταται. εἰς ᾅδου κάτεισιν, ἀλλ’ ἀνάγειψυχάς, ἀλλ’ εἰς οὐρανοὺς ἄνεισιν, ἀλλ’ ἥξει κρῖναι ζῶνταςκαὶ νεκρούς, καὶ τοὺς τοιούτους βασανίσαι λόγους. εἰταῦτα ἐμποιεῖ σοι τῆς πλάνης τὴν ἀφορμήν, ἐκεῖνά σουλύει τὴν πλάνην.ταῦτα τοῖς αἰνιγματισταῖς παρ’ ἡμῶν, οὐχ ἑκόντωνμέν· οὐ γὰρ ἡδὺ τοῖς πιστοῖς ἀδολεσχία καὶ λόγων ἀντίθεσις,ἀρκεῖ γὰρ καὶ εἷς ἀντικείμενος· πλὴν ἀναγκαίως διὰ τοὺςἐμπίπτοντας, ἐπεὶ καὶ διὰ τὰς νόσους τὰ φάρμακα, ἵνεἰδῶσι μὴ πάντα ὄντες σοφοὶ μηδὲ ἀήττητοι τὰ περιττὰκαὶ κενοῦντα τὸ εὐαγγέλιον. ὅταν γὰρ τὸ τοῦ λόγουδυνατὸν προβαλλώμεθα, τὸ πιστεύειν ἀφέντες, καὶ τὸ τοῦπνεύματος ἀξιόπιστον ταῖς ζητήσεσι λύσωμεν, εἶτα ἡττηθῇτοῦ μεγέθους τῶν πραγμάτων ὁ λόγος, — ἡττηθήσεται δὲπάντως, ἀπὸ ἀσθενοῦς ὀργάνου τῆς ἡμετέρας διανοίας2 προεγείρονται] ἐγείρονται ‘Reg. Cypr.’ || 8 λύει] λυέτω f21. 15 προβαλώμεθα cI. καταπ. ῥήγνυται] Matt, xxvii51; cp. Heb. ix 8, x 19 f.2. προεγείρονται] Matt, xxvii 52.The reading ἐγ. is manifestly a cor-rection, to bring Gr. into conformitywith St Μ.3. ζωοποιεῖ] John v 21.ib. καταλύει] Heb. ii 14; cp.2 Tim. i 10.4. ἀνάγει ψυχάς] Α ref. to thetraditional belief of the "harrowingof hell." Cp. Ign. Magn. 9 παρὼνἤγειρεν αὐτοὺς τοὺς προΦήτας) ἐκνεκρῶν, where see ’s note.The doctrine was naturally a favouriteone among the speculativesects; see Anaph. Pilati B 8 (Tisch.p. 447).21. It has been a disagreeabletask to examine these objections; believersare not fond of arguing; butit is important to shew that thearguments are not all on the side ofheresy. To rely upon logic, however,is the abandonment of faith, theevacuation of the Gospel, and itsbetrayal. God bring the opponentsto a better mind, and grant us asaving hold upon the Trinity.9. ταῦτα] sc εἰρήκαμεν or εἰρήσθω.11. εἷς ἀντικείμενος] Satan.ib. τοὺς ἐμπίπτοντας] ‘our assailants.’13. ἀήττητοι τ. π. κτλ] κτλ.] ‘invinciblein those fine arguments.which make void the Gospel.’15. προβαλλώμεθα] ’advance’ asa sword or shield.ib. τὸ το̣ῦ πνεύματος ἀ̣ξ.] ’defeatthe credentials of the Spirit by ourcontentions.’ὁρμώμενος — τί γίνεται; τὸ ἀσθενὲς τοῦ λόγου τοῦ μυστηρίουφαίνεται· καὶ οὕτω κένωσις τοῦ σταυροῦ τὸ τοῦ λόγουκομψὸν ἀναδείκνυται, ὡς καὶ Παύλῳ δοκεῖ. ἡ γὰρ πίστιςτοῦ καθ’ ἡμᾶς λόγου πλήρωσις. ὁ δὲ ἀναγγέλλων συνδέσμους,καὶ λύων κρατούμενα, ὁ καὶ ἡμῖν ἐπὶ νοῦν ἀγαγὼνδιαλῦσαι στραγγαλιὰς βιαίων δογμάτων, μάλιστα μὲν καὶτούτους μεταβαλὼν ποιήσειε πιστοὺς ἀντὶ τεχνολόγων,καὶ Χριστιανοὺς ἀνθ’ ὧν νῦν ὀνομάζονται. τοῦτο δὴ καὶπαρακαλοῦμεν· δεόμεθα ὑπὲρ χριστοῦ· καταλλάγητε τῷθεῷ, καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα μὴ σβέννυτε· μᾶλλον δέ, καταλλαγείηΧριστὸς ὑμῖν, καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα ὀψὲ γοῦν ἀναλάμψειεν. εἰδὲ λίαν ἔχοιτε φιλονείκως, ἀλλ’ ἡμεῖς γε σώζοιμεν ἡμῖναὐτοῖς τὴν τριάδα, καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς τριάδος σωζοίμεθα, μένοντεςεἰλικρινεῖς καὶ ἀπρόσκοποι, μέχρις ἀναδείξεως τελεωτέραςτῶν ποθουμένων, ἐν αὐτῷ Χριστῷ τῷ κυρίῳ ἡμῶν, ᾧ ἡδόξα εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας· Ἀμήν.6 στραγγαλιας] + τῶν a || δογμάτων] συναλλαγμάτων b || 7 ποιήσειε]ποιήσει a || 9 παρακαλοῦμεν] + καὶ g ΙΙ 10 σβέννυται a || 12 ἔχοιτε] ἔχετε’in nonnull.’ || 16 ’δοξα] + καὶ τὸ κράτος νυν καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ f1. τὸ ἁ. τοῦ μ. φ] ‘theweakness of the argument is held tobe the zveakness of our creed.2. κένωσις τοῦ ’στ’] I Cor. i 17.4. πλήρωσις] the opposite of κένῶσις. It is the ‘fulfilling of theword’ even when the λόγος is feeble.ib. ἀναγγέλλων . . . κρατούμενα]Dan. v 16. Seeiill.6. στραγγαλιάς] ’ tightly twistedknots’; a quotation from Is. lviiiwith δογμάτων substituted for συναλλαγμάτων.8. ὀνομάζονται] sc. Εὐνομιανοί.9. δεόμεθα ὁ. X.] 2 Cor. v 20.10. τὸ πνεῦμα μὴ σβ.] 1 Thess.v 19.14. εἰλικρ. κ. ἀπρóσκ.] Phil, i 10.