ΘΕΟΑΟΓΙΚΟΣ ΠΕΜΠΤΟΣ.ΠΕΡΙ TOY ΑΓΙΟΥ ΠΝΕΥΜΑΤΟΣ.Ὁ μὲν δὴ περὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ λόγος τοιοῦτος· καὶοὕτω διαπέφευγε τοὺς λιθάζοντας, διελθὼν διὰ μέσουαὐτῶν. ὁ λόγος γὰρ οὐ λιθάζεται, λιθοβολεῖ δέ, ὅτανἐθέλῃ, καὶ σφενδονᾷ θηρία, λόγους κακῶς τῷ ὄρει προσβαίνοντας.τί δ’ ἂν εἴποις, φασί, περὶ τοῦ ἁγίου πνεύματος ;πόθεν ἡμῖν ἐπεισάγεις ξένον θεὸν καὶ ἄγραφον ; τοῦτο ἤδηκαὶ οἱ περὶ τὸν υἱὸν μετριάζοντες. ὅπερ γὰρ ἐπὶ τῶν ὁδῶνεὑρεῖν ἐστὶ καὶ τῶν ποταμῶν, σχίζονταί τε ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων,καὶ εἰς ἄλληλα συνάγονται· τοῦτο κἀνταῦθα συμβαίνειδιὰ τὸν πλοῦτον τῆς ἀσεβείας, καὶ τοὺς τὰ ἄλλα διεστῶταςἐν ἄλλοις συμφέρεσθαι, ὥστε μηδὲ γινώσκειν καθαρῶςδύνασθαι τὸ συμφέρον ἢ τὸ μαχόμενον.Desunt omnia in a usque ad c. 6 medium1. 1 τοιοῦτος] τοσοῦτος be ’ Or. 1 ’ || 2 om διελθὼν δία μέσου ἀυτῶν d ||6 επεισαξεις d1. So the Son has escaped yourslotting; but even among those whoshrink from extremes in their oppositionto the Son, there are some whothink there is no scriptural authorityfor calling the Holy Spirit God.They part company with the extrememen, and then rejoin them, like roadsor rivers that divide and then meetagain.2. διελθὼν διὰ μ.] St John viii59. This ref. should be added tothose given by Tischendorf in loco.3. λιθοβολεῖ] cp. ii. 2.6. ἄγραφον] i.e. not so called inScripture.7. περὶ τ. υἱ. μετριάζοντες] Ath.ad Serap. i 1 makes the same complaint:ἐξελθόντων μὲν τινῶν ἀπὸτῶν Ἀρειανῶν διὰ τὴν κατὰ τοῦ υἱοῦτοῦ θεοῦ βλασφημίαν, φρονούντων δὲκατὰ τοῦ ἃγ ἴου πνεύματος. See Swetein Diet. Chr. Biogr., s.v. ‘HolyGhost,' p. 121, 122.ib. ἐπὶ τῶν ὁδῶν evp. ἐ.] Roadsand rivers sometimes divide, andthen the divergent portions inertagain lower down. So here, peoplediffer on most points but agree onothers, so that you never can be surewhere they agree and where theyare at issue.ἔχει μὲν οὖν τι καὶ δυσχερὲς ὁ περὶ τοῦ πνεύματοςλόγος, οὐ μόνον ὅτι ἐν τοῖς περὶ τοῦ υἱοῦ λόγοις ἀποκαμόντεςοἱ ἄνθρωποι θερμότερον τῷ πνεύματι προσπαλαίουσι·χρὴ γάρ τι πάντως αὐτοὺς ἀσεβεῖν, ἢ οὐδὲβιωτός ἐστιν αὐτοῖς ὁ βίος· ἀλλ’ ὅτι καὶ ἡμεῖς τῷ πλήθειτῶν ζητημάτων ἀποκναισθέντες ταὐτὸ πάσχομεν τοῖςκακοσίτοις, οἱ ἐπειδὰν πρός τι τῶν βρωμάτων ἀηδισθῶσι,πρὸς πάντα λόγον ὁμοίως, ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνοι πρὸς τροφήν,δυσχεραίνομεν. ὅμως διδότω τὸ πνεῦμα, καὶ ὁ λόγοςδραμεῖται, καὶ ὁ θεὸς δοξασθήσεται. τὸ μὲν οὖν ἐπιμελῶςἐξετάζειν καὶ διαιρεῖσθαι, ποσαχῶς ἢ τὸ πνεῦμα ἢ τὸἅγιον παρὰ τῇ θείᾳ γραφῆ νοεῖται καὶ λέγεται, μετὰ τῶνπροσφόρων τῇ θεωρίᾳ μαρτυριῶν, καὶ ὅ τι παρὰ ταῦτα2. 2 του υἱοῦ] OM του cd || 3 om οἱ e || 5 αὐτοῖς ἐστιν ce || 7 βρωμάτων]ζητηματων b2. The enquiry about the HolyGhost is difficult. Controversialistsdefeated over the Son attack the HolyGhost the more eagerly. Good Christians,sick of argument, wish theenquiry left alone. But we musttry. I shall not discuss the meaningof ‘ holy ’ and of ‘ Spirit, ’ of of thetwo words together. That has beendone by others.3. οἱ ἄνθρωποι] The clause χρὴγάρ τι κτλ., as well as the opposedἀλλ’ ὅτι καὶ ἡμεῖς, shows that Gr.does not mean 'men,' includinggood Christians who dislike controversy,but ’the men,' i.e. hisopponents. Their very failure, andthe exhaustion of their argumentsabout the Son ἀποκαμόντες), makethem the more keen in their attackupon the Spirit.6. ἀποκναισθέντες] Cp. i 2.7. κακοσίτοις] ’squeamish abouttheir diet.’ib. ot ἐπειδὰν κτλ.] The MSS.appear to give no sign of any otherreading, but the grammar is in hopelessconfusion. The simplest remedywould be to strike out οἳ beforeἐπειδάν, and to insert it before πρὸςπάντα. Otherwise we must supposethat some words have fallen outafter ἀηδισθῶσι, such as πάντα ἀποστρέφονται,followed by ἡμεῖς οὖν tobegin a new sentence. The requiredsense is plain, though it cannot begot out of the present text : that aspeople of delicate stomach, whohave had something offered themwhich they dislike, turn against foodin general, so we, disgusted withthe Eunomian arguments about theSon, are disinclined to listen toarguments of any kind about theSpirit, or indeed on any religioussubject.9. ὁ λόγος δραμεῖται] 1 Thess.iii 1. As, however, ὁ λόγος is here’the ’ and not directly ’theword of ’ Gr. shrinks frommaking it the subject of δοξασθήσεται,as in St Paul.11. ποσαχῶς] in how many differentsenses the words πνεῦμα andἄγιος are used in Scripture.13. μαρτυριῶν] ’ the texts that bearupon the investigation.’ἰδιοτρόπως τὸ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν συνημμένον, λέγω δὲ τὸ πνεῦματὸ ἅγιον, ἑτέροις παρήσομεν, οἲ καὶ ἑαυτοῖς καὶ ἡμῖν ταῦταπεφιλοσοφήκασιν, ἐπεὶ καὶ ἡμεῖς ταῦτα ἐκείνοις. αὐτοὶ δὲπρὸς τὰ ἑξῆς τοῦ λόγου τρεψόμεθα.Οἱ μὲν οὖν, ὡς ξένον τινὰ θεὸν καὶ παρέγγραπτονεἰσαγόντων ἡμῶν τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον, δυσχεραίνοντες, καὶσφόδρα προπολεμοῦντες τοῦ γράμματος, ἴστωσαν ἐκεῖφοβούμενοι φόβον, οὗ μὴ ἔστι φόβος, καὶ σαφῶς γινωσκέτωσανὅτι ἔνδυμα τῆς ἀσεβείας ἐστὶν αὐτοῖς ἡ φιλίατοῦ γράμματος, ὡς δειχθήσεται μικρὸν ὕστερον, ἐπειδὰντὰς ἐνστάσεις αὐτῶν εἰς δύναμιν διελέγξωμεν. ἡμεῖς δὲτοσοῦτον θαρροῦμεν τῇ θεότητι τοῦ πνεύματος, ὃ πρεσβεύομεν,ὥστε καὶ τῆς θεολογίας ἐντεῦθεν ἀρξόμεθα, τὰςαὐτὰς τῇ τριάδι φωνὰς ἐφαρμόζοντες, κἄν τισι δοκῇ2 ταυτα...ταυτα] ταὐτὰ . . . ταὐτὰ ceg || 4 τρεψώμεθα eg 3. 5 θέοντινα b || 12 0] ω ‘ Reg. a, Or. 1’3. ἐπεὶ καὶ ἡμεῖς] The use ofἐπεί, where perh. we might haveexpected ὡς, seems to be in favourof the reading ταὐτά, which wouldthus be taken to mean, ’since weagree with ’ But the mss.are not of very great value in mattersof this kind (and it must be rememberedthat the principal MS. fails usat this point) ; and it would be difficultto supply a verb that wouldsuit ταὐτά, which the obvious φιλοσοφοῦμενwould not do. Ἐπεὶ willtherefore indicate that the proposeddivision of labour is a fair one : theἔτεροι (by whom Gr. prob. means,not Basil, but students who werstill living to profit by his labours),have worked at that particular studyfor our advantage as well as theirown, and we will leave it to them,since we are labouring at this otherfor theirs as well as ours.3. Zeal for the letter ὁ Scriptureis sometimes a cloak forMy confidence in the Godheadof the Holy Ghost is absolute.He ἲς the Light that lighteneth everyman, equally with the Father andthe Son. I will fearlessly proclaimHim.5. παρέγγραπτον] wrongly enteredon the list ; cp. iii 18.7. πρόπολεμοῦντες τ. γρ] Gr.will not say τῆς γραφῆς ; cp. iv 1 οἱτοῦ γράμματος ἱερόσυλοι.ib. ἐκεῖ φοβούμενοι φ.] Ps. Iii 6(Hii 5).11. εἰς δύναμιν] ’ to the best ὁ ourpower.’12. θαρροῦμεν τῆ θ.] ‘have suchconfidence ’ not merely in thesense of believing that the thing isso, but in that of resting upon it forsupport.ib. πρεσβεύομεν] ’revere’; cp. i 5.13. τῆς θεολογίας] ‘of θὶς accountof the Godhead. ’ For numerousexx. of the use of the word, seeSuicer s.v.ib. ἐντεῦθεν] explained by theclause τὰς αὐτὰς . . . ἐφαρμόζοντες.τολμηρότερον. ἦν τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν, ὃ φωτίζει πάνταἄνθρωπον ἐρχόμενον εἰς τὸν κόσμον, ὁ πατήρ. ἦν τὸ φῶςτὸ ἀληθινόν, ὃ φωτίζει πάντα ἄνθρωπον ἐρχόμενον εἰς τὸνκόσμον, ὁ υἱός. ἦν τὸ φῶς τὸ ἀληθινόν, ὃ φωτίζειἄνθρωπον ἐρχόμενον εἰς τὸν κόσμον, ὁ ἄλλος παράκλητος.ἦν, καὶ ἢν, καὶ ἦν· ἀλλ’ ἓν ἦν. φῶς, καὶ φῶς, καὶ φῶς·ἀλλ’ ἓν φῶς, εἷς θεός. τοῦτό ἐστιν ὃ καὶ Δαβὶδπρότερον, λέγων· Ἐν τῷ φωτί σου ὀψόμεθα φῶς. καὶνῦν ἡμεῖς καὶ τεθεάμεθα καὶ κηρύσσομεν, ἐκ φωτὸς τοῦπατρὸς φῶς καταλαμβάνοντες τὸν υἱὸν ἐν φωτὶ τῷπνεύματι, σύντομον καὶ ἀπέριττον τῆς τριάδος θεολογίαν.ὁ ἀθετῶν ἀθετείτω, ὁ ἀνομῶν ἀνομείτω · ἡμεῖς ὂ νενοήκαμεν,καὶ κηρύσσομεν. ἐπ’ ὄρος ὑψηλὸν ἀναβησόμεθα καὶ βοήσομεν,εἰ μὴ κάτωθεν ἀκουοίμεθα. ὑψώσομεν τὸ πνεῦμα,οὐ φοβηθησόμεθα. εἰ δὲ καὶ φοβηθησόμεθα, ἡσυχάζοντες,οὐ κηρύσσοντες·Εἰ ἦν ὅτε οὐκ ἦν ὁ πατήρ, ἦν ὅτε οὐκ ἦν ὁ υἱός.7 πρότερον ἐφαντάσθη dg || 11 θεολογίαν] ὁμολογίαν b || 13 καὶ κηρύσσομεν]om καὶ f || 15 ησυχαζοντες] ἡσυχάσομεν f1. ἢν τὸ φῶς] John i 9. Thereis no need to suppose that Gr. intendsto make ἦν into a merecopula ; ‘ the true light was theFather.' Ὁ πατὴρ would morenaturally be in apposition to τὸφῶς.8. ἐν τῷ φωτί σου] Ps. xxxv 10(xxxvi 9). Both parts of the verseare frequently quoted by the Fathersas containing the doctrine of theTrinity. For the first half cp.Ambr. de Sp. S. i 15.9. τεθεάμεθα κτλ.] The passageis influenced by 1 John i 3, 5.ib. ἐκ φωτὸς τοῦ πατρός] This isimplied in the word ’Thy ’;the Holy Ghost is the ’s light,which implies that the Source fromwhich He proceeds is light also.12. ὁ ἀθετῶν κτλ] Is. xxi 2;with possibly a reminiscence of Ez.iii 27.13. ἐπ’ ὄρος ὑψηλόν κτλ.] Is. xl.9 ἐπ’ ὄρος ὑψ. ἀνάβηθι ὑψώσατε,μὴ φοβεῖσθε· εἰπόν . . . Ἴδου ὁ θεὸςἡμῶν.14, εἰ μὴ κάτωθεν ἀκ.] Gr. prob.thinks of his favourite reference toMoses on Sinai, and of the unpre-pared people who were forbidden togo up with him.15. εἰ δὲ καὶ φοβ.] ’and if weshould be afraid at all, it will be forholding our peace , not for proclaim-ing Him?4. There never was α time whenHe was not. No one person of theTrinity can be imagined to exist orto have ever existedwithoutthe others ;for an imperfect Godhead is unthinkable;able; especially a Godheadholiness. If He ever began to exist,He is on a level with us. Howcould He raise us, as He does, toGodhead?εἰ ἦν ὅτε οὐκ ἦν ὁ υἱός, ἦν ὅτε οὐδὲ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγ ἴον.εἰ τὸ ἓν ἢν ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς, καὶ τὰ τρία. εἰ τὸ ἓν κάτωβάλλεις, τολμῶ, καὶ λέγω, μηδὲ τὰ δύο θῇς ἄνω. τίς γὰρἀτελοῦς θεότητος ὄνησις ; μᾶλλον δὲ τίς θεότης, εἰ μὴτελεία ; τελεία δὲ πῶς, ᾗ λείπει τι πρὸς τελείωσιν ; λείπειδέ πὼς, μὴ ἐχούσῃ τὸ ἅγ ἴον· ἔχοι δ’ ἂν πῶς, μὴ τοῦτοἔχουσα ; ἢ γὰρ ἄλλη τις παρὰ τοῦτο ἡ ἁγιότης ’ καὶ ἥ τιςαὕτη νοεῖται, λεγέτω τις· ἢ εἴπερ ἡ αὐτή, πῶς οὐκ ἀπ’ἀρχῆς ; ὥσπερ ἄμεινον ὂν τῷ θεῷ εἶναί ποτε ἀτελεῖ,καὶ δίχα πνεύματος. εἰ μὴ ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς ἢν, μετ’ ἐμοῦτέτακται, καὶ εἰ μικρὸν πρὸ ἐμοῦ. χρόνῳ γὰρ ἀπὸ θεοῦτεμνόμεθα. εἰ τέτακται μετ’ ἐμοῦ, πῶς ἐμὲ ποιεῖ θεόν,ἢ πῶς συνάπτει θεότητι;Μαλλὸν δὲ φιλοσοφήσω σοι περὶ αὐτοῦ μικρὸνἄνωθεν. περὶ τριάδος γὰρ καὶ πρότερον διειλήφαμεν. τὸπνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον Σαδδουκαῖοι μὲν οὐδὲ εἶναι τὸ παράπαν4. 1 om τὸ ἄγιον cef2g || 1 τρια] + ἢν f || 4 θεότης εἰ μὴ τελεια] θεοτητοςἡμιτέλεια b : θεότητος εἰ μὴ τέλεια d : θεότης ἦ εἰ suprascr.) μὴ τέλεια c ||δ’ av] ’δε c || 7 η γαρ] εἰ γὰρ dfg || η αγιοτης] om η e || 8 η αυτη]αὔτη ceg || 10 δίχα] + TOudfg || 11 ἄπο] + του ’duo Colb.’3. μηδὲ τὰ δύο θῆς ἄνω] ‘Ι veiltureto tell you not to set the othertwo up ’ because it is uselessand illogical to attempt it.4. εἰ μὴ τελεία] I retain thisreading in the text, as it has mostauthority and makes good sense ;but I have little doubt that the truereading, which would account forthe variants, is ἡ μὴ τελεία.6. μὴ τοῦτο ἔχουσα] By τοῦτοGr. means the Holy Ghost.7. ἢ γὰρ ἄλλη τις] Besides the superiorMs. authority for ἢ, it accordsbetter with the καἰ before ἤ τις,which would be unintelligible withεἰ. It is quite in ’s style tointerpose the question with λαὶ beforepassing on to the second hornof the dilemma. ‘ Either the holinessof the Godhead is independentof the Holy Spirit, — and in that caseI should like to be informed whatit is supposed to be; or if ’ etc.10. μετ’ ἐμοῦ] in company withcreatures like us.5. The Sadducees denied His existence.Some of the best Greekthinkers had glimpses of Him, butthere was no agreement among themon the point. Christians likewiseare divided. While some believe Himto be God, some think Him α Divineoperation, or even α creature; somemake nice distinctions between Hisnature and those of the Father andSon.14. μικρὸν ἄνωθεν] ‘a little fartherback’; the same comparative usewhich we observed iu πόρρωθεν ii 2.15. διειλήφαμεν] ’ have discussed’;cp. iv 16.ἐνόμισαν· οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀγγέλους, οὐδὲ ἀνάστασιν· οὐκ οἶδ’ὅθεν τὰς τοσαύτας περὶ αὐτοῦ μαρτυρίας ἐν τῇ παλαιᾷδιαπτύσαντες. Ἑλλήνων δὲ οἱ θεολογικώτεροι, καὶ μᾶλλονἡμῖν προσεγγίσαντες, ἐφαντάσθησαν μέν, ὡς ἐμοὶ δοκεῖ·περὶ δὲ τὴν κλῆσιν διηνέχθησαν, νοῦν τοῦ παντός, καὶ τὸνθύραθεν νοῦν, καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα προσαγορεύσαντες. τῶν δὲκαθ’ ἡμᾶς σοφῶν οἱ μὲν ἐνέργειαν τοῦτο ὑπέλαβον, οἱ δὲκτίσμα, οἱ δὲ θεόν, οἱ δὲ οὐκ ἔγνωσαν ὁπότερον τούτων,αἰδοῖ τῆς γραφῆς, ὥς φασιν, ὡς οὐδέτερον σαφῶς δηλωσάσης.καὶ διὰ τοῦτο οὔτε σέβουσιν, οὔτε ἀτιμάζουσι,μέσως πὼς περὶ αὐτοῦ διακείμενοι, μᾶλλον δὲ καὶ λίανἀθλίως. καὶ τῶν θεὸν ὑπειληφότων οἱ μὲν ἄχρι διανοίαςεἰσὶν εὐσεβεῖς, οἱ δὲ τολμῶσιν εὐσεβεῖν καὶ τοῖς χείλεσιν.ἄλλων δὲ ἤκουσα μετρούντων θεότητα σοφωτέρων, οἳ τρίαμὲν εἶναι καθ’ ἡμᾶς ὁμολογοῦσι τὰ νοούμενα, τοσοῦτον δὲἀλλήλων διέστησαν, ὡς τὸ μὲν καὶ οὐσία καὶ δυνάμει5, 9 οὐδέτερον] οὐδὲν ἕτερον f ΙΙ 11 πέρι αὐτοῦ] πέρι αὐτὸ c2 || 14 σοφὼ.τερῶν] σοφώτερον ’in nonnull.’1. οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀγγ.] Acts xxiii 8.Gr.'s remark is not exactly logicalγάρ) ; the denial of angels wouldnot involve the denial of the HolySpirit. It looks as if he had carelesslytaken πνεῦμα in that passageto = ἅγιον πν.3. διαπτύσαντες] Cp.τοσαύτας Gr. prob. means, as DeBilly interprets, tot ac tanta.id. Ἑλλήνων δὲ οἱ θ.] no doubtesp. Plato and Aristotle. If theactual expression νοῦς τοῦ παντός doesnot occur in Plato, the thought isthere, and prob. the expressionitself in some of the Neo-Platonists. The phrase τὸν θύραθεννοῦν comes from Arist. de Gen. An.ii 3.5. διηνέχθησαν] ’’they differed,'i.e. from one another.6. τῶν δέ καθ’ ἤμ’. σ.] ‘of our ownclever people,' as opp. to Ἑλλήνων.There is an ironical tone in σοφῶν,because, although orthodox divinesare included in the phrase, Gr. isthinking most of the hereticaldoctors.11. μέσως πως...διακ.] ‘ hold a kindof neutral position with regardHim.’12. Βy τὰς 12. ἄχρι διανοίας] Like theμέχρι which has occurred severaltimes in these Orations, ἄχρι means‘in thought and no father.’ Theyhave not the courage to express it.14. ἄλλων δὲ ἤ·κουσα] 1 1 have heardothers, still cleverer, meting out Godfrequentlyhead? It is not known whom hemeans.15. τὰ νοούμενα] ‘that our notion isthat of three existences.’ Theis used throughout to avoid unduehandling of personal language.16. διέστησαν] 1st aor., ‘ they putthem at such a distance from eachother, as to make the first’ etc.ποιεῖν ἀόριστον· τὸ δὲ δυνάμει μέν, οὐκ οὐσίᾳ δέ· τὸ δὲἀμφοτέροις περιγραπτόν· ἄλλον τρόπον μιμούμενοι τοὺςδημιουργόν, καὶ συνεργόν, καὶ λειτουργὸν ὀνομάζοντας, καὶτὴν ἐν τοῖς ὀνόμασι τάξιν καὶ χάριν τῶν πραγμάτωνἀκολουθίαν εἶναι νομίζοντας.Ἡμῖν δὲ πρὸς μὲν τοὺς οὐδὲ εἶναι ὑπειληφόταςοὐδεὶς λόγος, ἢ τοὺς ληροῦντας ἐν Ἕλλησιν. μηδὲ γὰρἁμαρτωλῶν ἐλαίῳ πιανθείημεν εἰς τὸν λόγον. πρὸς δὲτοὺς ἄλλους οὕτω διαλεξόμεθα. τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον ἢ τῶνκαθ’ ἑαυτὸ ὑφεστηκότων πάντως ὑποθετέον, ἢ τῶν ἐνἑτέρῳ θεωρουμένων· ὧν τὸ μὲν οὐσίαν καλοῦσιν οἱ περὶταῦτα δεινοί, τὸ δὲ συμβεβηκός. εἰ μὲν οὖν συμβέβηκεν,ἐνέργεια τοῦτο ἂν εἴη θεοῦ. τί γὰρ ἕτερον, ἢ τίνος ; τοῦτο5 νομιζοντας] -τες b 6. 7 ουδεις] ουδεις ο b: ουδε εις ce ‘duo Reg.’ ||9 διαλεξωμεθα b2. ἄλλον τρόπον μιμ.] ‘imitating,though in a somewhat different form,those,‘ etc. He seems to meanArius.4. τάξιν καὶ χάριν] The wordχάρις appears to be used in the sensewhich Lidd. and Scott put as iv 2viz. ‘homage due,’ ‘majesty’; andτάξις accordingly will be, not exactlythe order in which the namesstand in the Bible, but the rankwhich is inherent in each. ‘Whothink that the rank and dignity ofthe respective names denotes a gradationof the realities which theyrepresent.’ The πράγματα, of course,are the three Blessed Persons themselves.6. Against Sadducee and GreekI shall not indulge myself to argue,but only against the others. TheHoly Ghost is either a contingent ora substantive existence. If contingent,He must be a Divine operation orinfluence; but this does not agreewith the personal language of Scripture.If He is a substantive existence,He is either God or a creature;there is no betwixt and between. IfHe is a creature, how can we ‘believein’ Him? He must be God.8. ἁμαρτ. ἐλαίῳ] Ps. cxl (cxli) 5.It may be asked, why it would bean anointing of himself with the oilof sinners for his oration to enter intocontroversy with such persons, whilehe feels himself at liberty to arguewith the Macedonians. The answeris, that the ἁμαρτωλοὶ are not opponents(as the Donatists might havesaid) too bad even to be arguedwith. He means that, although itmight add a richness and profusionto his discourse, there would be akind of sinful self-indulgence indemolishing opinions with whichhe was not practically confronted.9. τῶν καθ’ ἑατυτὸ ὑφ.] ‘either anindependent subsistence, or a thingobserved in something else.’12. συμβεβηκός] something contingent,‘a contingency’; a thing whichhappens to be so, but might havebeen otherwise.13. ἐνέργεια τοῦτο ἂν εἴη θ.] ‘it (theHoly Spirit so conceived of) will bean operation of God’— an influence,an inspiration, or the like—‘forwhat else could it be, or from whombesides could it come?’γάρ πως μᾶλλον καὶ φεύγει σύνθεσιν. καὶ εἰ ἐνέργεια,ἐνεργηθήσεται δῆλον ὅτι, οὐκ ἐνεργήσει, καὶ ὁμοῦ τῷ ἐνεργηθῆναιπαύσεται. τοιοῦτον γὰρ ἡ ἐνέργεια. πῶς οὖνἐνεργεῖ, καὶ τάδε λέγει, καὶ ἀφορίζει, καὶ λυπεῖται, καὶπαροξύνεται, καὶ ὅσα κινουμένου σαφῶς ἐστίν, οὐ κινήσεως;εἰ δὲ οὐσία τις, οὐ τῶν περὶ τὴν οὐσίαν, ἤτοι κτίσμαὑποληφθήσεται, ἢ θεός. μέσον γάρ τι τούτων, ἤτοι μηδετέρουμετέχον, ἢ ἐξ ἀμφοῖν σύνθετον, οὐδ’ ἂν οἱ τοὺςτραγελάφους πλάττοντες ἐννοήσαιεν. ἀλλ᾿ εἰ μὲν κτίσμα,πῶς εἰς αὐτὸ πιστεύομεν, ἢ ἐν αὐτῷ τελειούμεθα ; οὐ γὰρταὐτόν ἐστι πιστεύειν εἴς τι, καὶ περὶ αὐτοῦ πιστεύειν.τὸ μὲν γάρ ἐστι θεότητος, τὸ δὲ παντὸς πράγματος. εἰ δὲθεός, ἀλλ᾿ οὐ κτίσμα, οὐδὲ ποίημα, οὐδὲ σύνδουλον, οὐδ᾿ὅλως τι τῶν ταπεινῶν ὀνομάτων.1 και ει] om ει b || 2 τω] το b || 7 υπολειφθησεται ‘Or. 1’1. φεύγει σύνθεσιν] It is assumedthat all will agree that the simplerthe account, the better.2. ἐνεργηθήσεται . . . παύσεται] Thefut. is logical, not temporal. It isof the very nature of an ‘operation ’to be incapable of independentaction, or to continue when theoperator stops.3. πῶς οὖν ἐνεργεῖ] The Bible,however, attributes to the HolySpirit operations of His own, suchas ‘saying’ this and that (τάδε),‘separating’ (an inexact reminiscenceof Acts xiii 2).4. λυπεῖται] Eph. iv 30.5. παροξύνεται] Is. lxiii 10.ib. κινουμένου] middle voice.These are notes, Gr. says, not ofa motion in the abstract (such as anἐνέργεια is), but of the thing whichis in motion.6. τῶν περὶ τὴν οὐ.] ‘an existence,and not an attribute ofexistence.’9. τραγελάφους] the typical fabulouscompound.10. τελειούμεθα] in baptism; cp.§ 29.ib. οὐ γὰρ ταὐτόν] ‘it is not the samething to believe in anything, and tobelieve statements about it; the firstis peculiar to God, the second can bedone with any thing.’ See Pearsonon the Creed I believe in God; whorightly says that the distinction ismore characteristic of Western thanof Eastern theology.13. οὐδὲ ποίημα] sc. ἐστί. The apodosisbegins at this point, not at ἀλλ᾿οὐ κτίσμα.7. Now it is your turn. ‘Is Hebegotten, or unbegotten? If begotten,of whom ? If of the Father, thereare two Sons; if of the Son, He isa grandson.’ Your names do notterrify me. Because we are obligedto speak of ‘Sonship’ in the Godhead,it does not follow that all earthlynomenclature would apply; or atthat rate you will have to say alimanner of strange things.Ἑνταῦθα σὸς ὁ λόγος ’ αἱ σφενδόναι πεμπέσθωσαν,οἱ συλλογισμοὶ πλεκέσθωσαν. ἢ ἀγέννητον πάντως, ἢγεννητόν. καὶ εἰ μὲν ἀγέννητον, δύο τὰ ἄναρχα. εἰ δὲγεννητόν, ὑποδιαίρει πάλιν· ἢ ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς τοῦτο, ἢ ἐκτοῦ υἱοῦ. καὶ εἰ μὲν ἐκ τοῦ πατρός, υἱοὶ δύο καὶ ἀδελφοί.σὺ δέ μοι πλάττε καὶ διδύμους, εἰ βούλει, ἢ τὸν μὲνπρεσβύτερον, τὸν δὲ νεώτερον ’ ἐπειδὴ λίαν εἶ φιλοσώματος.εἰ δὲ ἐκ τοῦ υἱοῦ, πέφηνέ, φησι, καὶ υἱωνὸς ἡμῖν θεός· οὗτί ἂν γένοιτο παραδοξότερον ; ταῦτα μὲν οὖν οἱ σοφοὶ τοῦκακοποιῆσαι, τὰ δὲ ἂγ ἀθ’ ἁ γράφειν οὐ θέλοντες. ἐγὼ δὲ εἰμὲν ἑώρων ἀναγκαίαν τὴν διαίρεσιν, ἐδεξάμην ἂν τὰ πράγματα,οὐ φοβηθεὶς τὰ ὀνόματα. οὐ γάρ, ἐπειδὴ κατά τινασχέσιν ὑψηλοτέραν υἱὸς ὁ υἱός, οὐ δυνηθέντων ἡμῶν ἄλλωςἢ οὕτως ἐνδείξασθαι τὸ ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ ὁμοούσιον, ἤδη καὶπάσας οἰητέον ἀναγκαῖον εἶναι τὰς κάτω κλήσεις, καὶ τῆςἡμετέρας συγγενείας, μεταφέρειν ἐπὶ τὸ θεῖον. ἢ τάχα ἃνσύ γε καὶ ἄρρενα τὸν θεὸν ἡμῖν ὑπολάβοις, κατὰ τὸν λόγοντοῦτον, ὅτι θεὸς ὀνομάζεται, καὶ πατήρ ; καὶ θῆλύ τι τὴνθεότητα, ὅσον ἐπὶ ταῖς κλήσεσι ; καὶ τὸ πνεῦμα οὐδέτερον,ὅτι μὴ γεννητικόν ; εἰ δέ σοι καὶ τοῦτο παιχθείη, τῇ ἑαυτοῦ7, 4 υποδιαιρησει ’Reg. Copr.' || 15 τῆς] τὰς b ΙΙ 18 omn ’Reg. a’1. ἐνταῦθα σὸς 6 λ.] ‘now for yoursay’ It begins at ἢ ἀγέννητον.3. δύο τὰ ἄναρχα] viz. the Fatherand the Spirit.6. σὺ δέ μοι πλ.] This is Gr.'sinterpolation into his adversary'sargument.7. φιλοσώματος] i.e. determinedto refer everything to material standards.9. σοφοὶ τοῦ κακ’.] Jer. iv 22. Itis hard to see why Gr. balances thisclause by ‘ and will not write whatis good.' It is not a reference toanything in Scripture. No doubtthe Eunomian literature was as extensiveas its oral polemic.11. τὰ πράγματα] much as at theend of § 5. The ’names’ which hesays would not scare him ὅσ’ aresuch as that of υἱωνός. Not that headmits that such a name wouldnecessarily be applicable, even ifthe ‘ facts ’ were as suggested.is shewn in the next sentence.12. κατά τινα σχ. ὑψ.] ‘accordingto sonic relationship too lofty for usto understand' the Son is Son. Noother language would express atonce His derivation from the Fatherand His being of one substance withHim. It does not follow, however,that all the nomenclature of ourearthly relationships is to be trans-ferred straightway to the Godhead.20. εἰ δέ σοι κ· τοῦτο π·] ’and ifyou like to carry the gamt farther icp. iii 7 προσπαιξω τὸν π.θελήσει τὸν θεὸν συγγενόμενον, κατὰ τοὺς παλαιοὺς λήρουςκαὶ μύθους, γεννήσασθαι τὸν υἱόν, εἰσήχθη τις ἡμῖν καὶΜαρκίωνος καὶ Οὐαλεντίνου θεὸς ἀρρενόθηλυς, τοῦ τοὺςκαινοὺς αἰῶνας ἀνατυπώσαντος.Ἐπεὶ δέ σου τὴν πρώτην διαίρεσιν οὐ δεχόμεθα,τὴν μηδὲν ἀγεννήτου καὶ γεννητοῦ μέσον ὑπολαμβάνουσαν,αὐτίκα οἰχήσονταί σοι μετὰ τῆς σεμνῆς διαιρέσεως οἱἀδελφοὶ καὶ οἱ υἱωνοί, ὥσπερ τινὸς δεσμοῦ πολυπλόκουτῆς πρώτης ἀρχῆς λυθείσης συνδιαλυθέντες, καὶ τῆςθεολογίας ὑποχωρήσαντες. ποῦ γὰρ θήσεις τὸ ἐκπορευτόν.εἰπέ μοι, μέσον ἀναφανὲν τῆς σῆς διαιρέσεως, καὶ παρὰκρείσσονος ἢ κατὰ σὲ θεολόγου, τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν, εἰσαγόμενον;εἰ μὴ τὴν φωνὴν ἐκείνην τῶν σῶν ἐξεῖλες εὐαγγελίων,διὰ τὴν τρίτην σου διαθήκην, Τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον,ὃ παρὰ τοῦ πατρὸς ἐκπορεύεται· ὃ καθ’ ὅσον μὲν ἐκεῖθενἐκπορεύεται, οὐ κτίσμα· καθ’ ὅσον δὲ οὐ γεννητόν, οὐχ3 om καὶ Οὐαλεντίνου aceg 8, 8 οἱ υἱωνοὶ] om οι df || 9 λυθεισης]διαλυθείσης bdf || 16 om ἐκπορεύεται f1. συγγενόμενον] ‘ by intercoursewith His own ’; cp. iii 6. The’ancient ’ are prob. those ofheathen mythology, not of Gnosticism.3. Μαρκίωνος] Marcion's systemhas really nothing to do with Gnosticismand its fantastic inventions,although he is usually reckonedamong the Gnostics. Perh. thereforeGr. uses his name with that ofValentinus to denote in contemptuousindifference Gnosticism ingeneral ; or perh. he confuses Marcionwith Marcus, the disciple ofVal., from whom the Marcosianstake their name.ib. θεὸς ἀρρενόθηλυς] Gr. does notmean that Val. taught that God wasἀρρ., but only compares the Godwho has just been imagined withthe bisexual beings of the Valentiniansystem. See Iren. I i 1 εἶναιγὰρ αὐτῶν ἕκαστον ἀρρενόθηλυν, οὔτως·τως· πρῶτον rbv Προπάτορα ἡνῶσθαικατὰ συζυγίαν τῆ ἑαυτοῦ Ἐννοίᾳ κτλ.4. αἰῶνας] ’who devised thosestrange Acons.’8. I do not admit thai He mustbe either begotten or unbegotten.Christ says that He ’proceeds? Youask what that means. Our powersare insufficient to explain.9. ἀρχῆς] as in ii 25, an ‘ end?Δεσμός seems to be used in the senseof a hnot.ib. τῆς θ. ὑποχωρήσαντες] ‘retiringing from your account of the God-head.’14. διὰ τὴν τρίτην σ. δ.] ‘ to suityour Third Testament? or, as wemight say, ’your Newest Testament.’ib. τὸ πν.... ἐκπορεύεται] John xv26.15. ἐκεῖθεν] from such a sourceas the Father.υἱός· καθ’ ὅσον δὲ ἀγεννήτου καὶ γεννητοῦ μέσον, θεός.καὶ οὕτω σου τὰς τῶν συλλογισμῶν ἄρκυς διαφυγὸν θεὸςἀναπέφηνε, τῶν σῶν διαιρέσεων ἰσχυρότερος. τίς οὖν ἡἐκπόρευσις; εἰπὲ σὺ τὴν ἀγεννησίαν τοῦ πατρός, κἀγὼτὴν γέννησιν τοῦ υἱοῦ φυσιολογήσω, καὶ τὴν ἐκπόρευσιντοῦ πνεύματος, καὶ παραπληκτίσωμεν ἄμφω εἰς θεοῦμυστήρια παρακύπτοντες· καὶ ταῦτα τίνες; οἱ μηδὲ τὰ ἐνποσὶν εἰδέναι δυνάμενοι, μηδὲ ψάμμον θαλασσῶν, καὶσταγόνας ὑετοῦ, καὶ ἡμέρας αἰῶνος ἐξαριθμεῖσθαι, μὴ ὅτιγε θεοῦ βάθεσιν ἐμβατεύειν, καὶ λόγον ὑπέχειν τῆς οὕτωςἀρρήτου καὶ ὑπὲρ λόγον φύσεως.Τί οὖν ἐστί, φησιν, ὃ λείπει τῷ πνεύματι, πρὸς τὸεἶναι υἱόν; εἰ γὰρ μὴ λεῖπόν τι ἦν, υἱὸς ἃν ἦν. οὐ λείπεινφαμέν· οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐλλειπὴς θεός· τὸ δὲ τῆς ἐκφάνσεως, ἵνοὕτως εἴπω, ἢ τῆς πρὸς ἄλληλα σχέσεως διάφορον διάφοροναὐτῶν καὶ τὴν κλῆσιν πεποίηκεν. οὐδὲ γὰρ τῷ υἱῷ λείπειτι πρὸς τὸ εἶναι πατέρα, οὐδὲ γὰρ ἔλλειψις ἡ υἱότης, ἀλλ’οὐ παρὰ τοῦτο πατήρ. ἢ οὕτω γε καὶ τῷ πατρὶ λείψει τιπρὸς τὸ εἶναι υἱόν· οὐ γὰρ υἱὸς ὁ πατήρ. ἀλλ’ οὐκ2 διαφυγὼν d || 3 ισχυροτεροσ] υφηλοτερος ’tres Colb.' || 6 παραπληκτισομενbedf 9, 13 υιον] υιω b || 14 ἐλλιπὴς cd2f2 || 15 om διάφορον sec.loco e || 17 om τι b || ουδε] οὐ c || 18 λειψει] λείπει c || 19 υἱὸν] υἱὼ b1. ἀγενν. κ. γενν. μέσον] Thetermἐκπορεύεσθαι denotes a relationship tothe Unbegotten Father which is atleast not more distant than that ofGeneration, and therefore impliesthe essential Deity of Him who soproceeds.5. φυσιολογήσω] ‘ will tell youthe natural history of.’6. παραπληκriσωμεν] ‘ and let usboth go mad for prying into thesecrets of God' ; a well-known superstition.7. καἰ ταῦτα τίνες] ‘ and who arewe that we should pry into them ?'8. ψάμμον θαλασσῶν κτλ.] Ecclus.i 2.10. θεοῦ βάθεσιν] ι Cor. ii 10.ib. λόγον πἐχειν] ‘ to submit’’present an account.’9. ‘Where does He come short ofbeing a Son ? yon ask. .It is no defect, any more than it is adefect in the Son not to ἠ’ Father, orin the Father not to be Son. Thenames ’denote unalterable relationshipswithin a single nature.14. ἐκφάνσεως] The difference ofdesignation corresponds to B realdifference in the mode of Their comingforth into existence, and of Theirmutual relation. Ἔκφανσις doesnot mean Their manifestation to us,but Their eternal issuing forth fromthe First Source.19. ἀλλ’ οὐκ ἐλλ. τ. ποθεν] ’butthis language does not indicate ain any direction, nor the inferiorityof essence.' The ταῦταnot refer only to what has immediatelypreceded, viz. that the Fatheris not Son ; this would not suggestany thought of ὕφεσις. It refers alsoto the ’s not being Father, northe Spirit Son.ἐλλείψεως ταῦτά ποθεν, οὐδὲ τῆς κατὰ τὴν οὐσίαν ὑφέσεως ·αὐτὸ δὲ τὸ μὴ γεγεννῆσθαι, καὶ τὸ γεγεννῆσθαι, καὶ τὸἐκπορεύεσθαι, τὸν μὲν πατέρα, τὸν δὲ υἱόν, τὸ δὲ τοῦθ’ὅπερ λέγεται πνεῦμα ἅγιον προσηγόρευσεν, ἵνα τὸ ἀσύγχυτονσώζηται τῶν τριῶν ὑποστάσεων ἐν τῇ μιᾷ φύσει τεκαὶ ἀξίᾳ τῆς θεότητος. οὔτε γὰρ ὁ υἱὸς πατήρ, εἷς γὰρπατήρ, ἀλλ’ ὅπερ ὁ πατήρ· οὔτε τὸ πνεῦμα υἱὸς ὅτι ἐκτοῦ θεοῦ, εἷς γὰρ ὁ μονογενής, ἀλλ’ ὅπερ ὁ υἱός· ἓν τὰ τρίατῇ θεότητι, καὶ τὸ ἓν τρία ταῖς ἰδιότησιν· ἵνα μήτε τὸ ἓνΣαβέλλιον ᾖ, μήτε τὰ τρία τῆς πονηρᾶς νῦν διαιρέσεως.Τί οὖν ; θεὸς τὸ πνεῦμα ; πάνυ γε. τί οὖν,ὁμοούσιον ; εἴπερ θεός. δὸς οὖν μοί, φησιν, ἐκ τοῦ αὐτοῦ2 τὸ γεγεννησθαι] το γεγενῆσθαι a: om καὶ τὸ γεγεννῆσθαι f || 3 εκπεπορευσθαιαἰ ’Reg. Cypr.' || 6 αξια] εξουσια e || 7 ὑίος] ο ὑίος a || 8 oὑίος] om ο d || om τὰ f || 9 om τῆ bed || 10 νυν] σου νυν b ’Reg.Cypr.' : om νυν c : νυνι e4. προσηγόρευσεν] The abovementionedfacts ’proclaim Them ’respectively Father, Son, and HolySpirit. The aor. takes us back tothe moment when these titles werefirst assigned in Scripture.5. ποστάσεων] here used in therecognised ’personal’ sense.7. δπερ ὁ πατήρ] He is not theFather, but He is all that the Fatheris.ib. δτι ἐκ τοῦ θ.] The fact thatHe is of the Father's essence (1 Cor.ii 12) does not make Him Son.8. ἐν τὰ τρία τῆ θ.] The Three(Gr. again avoids the masc.) areOne — an undivided unit — in theirnature; the One is Three — a Trinity— in the ineffaceable distinctionbetween the persons. The latterobservation removes the Sabellianconception of the unity ; the formerremoves the Eunomian division ofthe natures. In the construction ofthe last clause, τῆς π. ν. διαιρέσεωςis the predicate after ἦ understood,like οὐκ ἐλλείψεως above.10 You are surprised at ourcalling Him God, consubstantial withthe Father. He must be so if thereis only God God and one Godhead. Iam ashamed to use earthly illustrations;but even in natural historythere are very different modes of reproductionwhich it might help youto consider.12. δὸς οὖν μοι] The word διδόναιis not used here in its frequentsense of a logical concession ; for itwould be no concession to theEunomians to ’give’ what is hererequired. It means rather, ’shewme’ ‘convince me that it is so.’ TheEunomian offers, if convinced thattwo consubstantial persons issue fromthe same Divine Source, to acknow-ledge each of them to be a God.Gr. illustrates the illogical characterof the offer by a counter-paralogism.‘Shew me,’ he says, ‘that there isthan one sort of God, and Iwill shew you the same Trinity thatwe now believe in, name and thing.’It is as unreasonable to deduceditheism or tritheism from theCatholic doctrine of the relation ofthe Son and Spirit to the Father, asit would be to deduce the Catholicdoctrine of the Trinity from a beliefin Godheads of varying quality.τὸ μὲν υἱόν, τὸ δὲ οὐχ υἱόν, εἶτα ὁμοούσια, καὶ δέχομαιθεὸν καὶ θεόν. δός μοι καὶ σὺ θεὸν ἄλλον, καὶ Φύσινθεοῦ, καὶ δώσω σοι τὴν αὐτὴν τριάδα μετὰ τῶν αὐτῶνὀνομάτων τε καὶ πραγμάτων. εἰ δὲ εἰς θεὸς μίαφύσις ἡ ἀνωτάτω, πόθεν παραστήσω σοι τὴν ὁμοίωσιν;ἢ ζητεῖς πάλιν ἐκ τῶν κάτω καὶ τῶν περὶ σέ; λίαν μὲναἰσχρόν, καὶ οὐκ αἰσχρὸν μόνον, ἁλλὰ καὶ μάταιον ἐπιεικῶς,ἐκ τῶν κάτω τῶν ἄνω τὴν εἰκασίαν λαμβάνειν, καὶ τῶνἀκινήτων ἐκ τῆς ῥευστῆς φύσεως, καί, ὅ Φησιν Ἠσαίας,ἐκζητεῖσθαι τὰ ζῶντα ἐν τοῖς νεκροῖς· ὅμως δὲ πειράσομαι,σὴν χάριν, κἀντεῦθεν δοῦναί τινα τῷ λόγῳ βοήθειαν. τὰμὲν οὖν ἄλλα παρήσειν μοι δοκῶ, πολλὰ ἃν ἔχων ἐκ τῆςπερὶ ζώων ἱστορίας εἰπεῖν, τὰ μὲν ἡμῖν γνώριμα, τὰ δὲτοῖς ὀλίγοις, ὅσα περὶ τὰς τῶν ζώων γενέσεις ἡ Φύσιςἐφιλοτεχνήσατο. γεννᾶσθαι γὰρ λέγεται, οὐκ ἐκ τῶναὐτῶν τὰ αὐτὰ μόνον, οὐδὲ ἐξ ἑτέρων ἕτερα, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐξἑτέρων τὰ αὐτά, καὶ ἐκ τῶν αὐτῶν ἕτερα. εἰ δέ τῳ πιστὸςὁ λόγος, καὶ ἄλλος ἐστὶ τρόπος γεννήσεως, αὐτό τι ὑφ’ἑαυτοῦ δαπανώμενον καὶ τικτόμενον. ἔστι δὲ ἃ καὶ10. 1 δεχομαι] + καὶ c || 2 ἄλλον θέον dfg || 4 εἰς θεὸς μία φυσις] εἰς οθεὸς καὶ μία φύσις b ’Reg. Cypr.’: εἰς θεὸς καὶ μία φύσις f ‘ plures Reg. etColb.’: εἰς θεὸς τε καὶ μία Φυσις de || 6 η] εἰ ’δε ‘ Reg. Cypr.’ || το τα ζωντα]τον ὄντα ‘Or. 1’9. ῤευστῆς] ‘changeable,’ ‘transitory’tory’; cp. ii 22 πῶς κάτω μῶ.10. ἐκζητεῖσθαι τὰ ζ.] Is. viii 19;cp. Luke xxiv 5.13. ἡμῖν γνώριμα] known to usall by direct observation; opp. towhat only few have had the opportunityof noting. Gr.’s lore onsubject is derived from Aristotle.16. ἐξ ἑτέρων τὰ αὐτά κτλ.]instance given by Elias is that offrogs, some of which are the off-spring of frogs, and others the spontaneousproduct of the marsh, andyet equally frogs. His instance ofthe converse is more true to nature,but a less exact illustration of hissubject.19.δαπανώμενον] ‘consumed,’cp. iv 6. The ref. of course is tothe phoenix (Herod, ii 73); see Lightfoot's note on Clem, ad cor.§ 25. Gr. himself evidently does notquite believe the fable.ἐξίσταταί πὼς ἑαυτῶν, ἐξ ἄλλων ζώων εἰς ἄλλα μεθιστάμενάτε καὶ μεταποιούμενα, Φιλοτιμίᾳ Φιλοτιμίᾳ ἤδη δὲκαὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ, τὸ μὲν οὐ γέννημα, τὸ δὲ γέννημα, πλὴνὁμοούσια· ὃ καὶ τῷ παρόντι πὼς μᾶλλον προσέοικεν. ἓνδέ τι τῶν ἡμετέρων εἰπών, ὃ καὶ πᾶσι γνώριμον, ἐφ’ἕτερον μεταβήσομαι λόγον.Ὁ Ἀδὰμ τί ποτε ἦν ; πλάσμα θεοῦ. τί δὲ ἡΕὖα; τμῆμα τοῦ πλάσματος. τί δὲ ὁ Σήθ;γέννημα. ἆρ’ οὖν ταὐτόν σοι φαίνεται πλάσμα, καὶ τμῆμα,καὶ γέννημα; πῶς οὔ; ὁμοούσια δὲ ταῦτα, ἢ τί; πῶς δ’ οὔ;ὡμολόγηται οὖν καὶ τὰ διαφόρως ὑποστάντα τῆς αὐτῆςεἶναι οὐσίας ἐνδέχεσθαι. λέγω δὲ ταῦτα, οὐκ ἐπὶ τὴνθεότητα φέρων τὴν πλάσιν, ἢ τὴν τομήν, ἤ τι τῶν ὅσασώματος, μή μοί τις ἐπιφυέσθω πάλιν τῶν λογομάχων,ἐπὶ δὲ τούτων θεωρῶν, ὡς ἐπὶ σκηνῆς, τὰ νοούμενα. οὐδὲγὰρ οἷόν τε τῶν εἰκαζομένων οὐδὲν πρὸς πᾶσαν ἐξικνεῖσθαικαθαρῶς τὴν ἀλήθειαν. καὶ τί ταῦτά, φασιν; οὐ γὰρ τοῦἑνὸς τὸ μὲν γέννημα, τὸ δὲ ἄλλο τι. τί οὖν; ἡ Eὖα καὶΣήθ, οὐχὶ τοῦ αὐτοῦ τοῦ Ἀδάμ; τίνος γὰρ ἄλλου; ἢ καὶ11. 9 ταὐτὸν] ταύτα acg || ΙΙ τὰ] τὸ e || 1 7 φασιν] φησιν c1. εἰς ἄλλα μεθιστάμενα] Eliasvery properly instances gnats, asout of larvae. It wasprob. not known that such larvaeinvariably developed into gnats, orthat all gnats had been such larvae.2. φιλοτιμίᾳ φ] ‘in nature'seagerness to excel’; cp. ἢ φ. ἐφιλοτεχνήσατοabove.ib. ἤδη δὲ καὶ τοῦ αὖ] The samecreature produces offspring in morethan one way, by generation andotherwise; and both kinds of off-spring have the same nature as theparent. Gr. is prob. thinking ofthe way in which some low forms ofanimal life appear (like plants) tobe propagated by ‘cuttings’ as wellas by ‘seed.’4. τῷ παρόντι] ‘the case in point,’i.e. of the Holy Spirit.11. Human history, however,presents a better, if still an incomplete,illustration. Adam, Eve, andSeth came into being in very differentways; yet they are consubstantial.9. ταὐτόν σοι φ.] ‘to have thesame nature.’14. ἐπιφυέσθω] Cp. i 4.15. θεωρῶν ὡς ἐπὶ σκ] Theseearthly illustrations form a kind ofstage upon which the higher thingsare represented for our study.17. οὐ γὰρ τοῦ ἑνός] This is partof the objection, not of Gr.’s reply.From the one person of the Father,they say, there cannot issue twoothers, one by generation, the otherin some other way.ἀμφότεροι γεννήματα ; οὐδαμῶς. ἀλλὰ τί; τὸ μὲν τμῆμα,τὸ δὲ γέννημα. καἰ μὴν ἀμφότεροι ταὐτὸν ἀλλήλοις·ἄνθρωποι γάρ· οὐδεὶς ἀντερεῖ. παύσῃ οὖν ἀπομαχόμενοςπρὸς τὸ πνεῦμα, ὡς ἢ γέννημα πάντως, ἢ μὴ ὁμοούσιον,μηδὲ θεόν, καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἀνθρωπίνων τὸ δυνατὸν λαβὼν τῆςἡμετέρας ὑπολήψεως; ἐγὼ μὲν οἶ μαί σοι καλῶς ἔχειν, εἰμὴ λίαν ἔγνωκας φιλονεικεῖν, καὶ πρὸς τὰ δῆλα μάχεσθαι.Ἀλλὰ τίς προσεκύνησε τῷ πνεύματί, φησιν ; τίςἢ τῶν παλαιῶν, ἢ τῶν νέων ; τίς δὲ προσηύξατο ; ποῦ δὲτὸ χρῆναι προσκυνεῖν ἢ προσεύχεσθαι γέγραπται ; καὶπόθεν τοῦτο ἔχεις λαβών ; τὴν μὲν τελεωτέραν αἰτίανἀποδώσομεν ὕστερον, ἡνίκα ἂν περὶ τοῦ ἀγράφου διαλεγώμεθα.νῦν δὲ τοσοῦτον εἰπεῖν ἐξαρκέσει· τὸ πνεῦμά ἐστιν,ἐν ᾧ προσκυνοῦμεν, καὶ δι’ οὗ προσευχόμεθα. Πνεῦμαγάρ, φησιν, ὁ θεός, καὶ τοὺς προσκυνοῦντας αὐτὸν ἐνπνεύματι καἰ ἀληθείᾳ προσκυνεῖν δεῖ. καὶ πάλιν· Τὸ γὰρτί προσευξώμεθα, καθ’ ὃ δεῖ, οὐκ οἴδαμεν, ἁλλ’ αὐτὸ τὸπνεῦμα ὑπερεντυγχάνει ὑπὲρ ἡμῶν στεναγμοῖς ἀλαλήτοις.καί, Προσεύξομαι τῷ πνεύματι, προσεύξομαι δὲ καὶ τῷ νοί,3 παύση] παύσαι b ‘Or. I’ || 6 σοι] σε ace ‘quinque Reg.’ || 7 τὰ δηλα]ἄδηλα e1. 12. II λαβὼν ἔχεις df || 16 ’δει προσκυνεῖν bdf || 17 προσευξόμεθαacdefg || 18 υπερεντυγχανει] εντυγχ. c || 19 προσεύξομαι primo loco] + δε b:-ξωμαι (et in secundo) a5. καἰ ἐκ τῶν ἄνθρωπ’] ‘evenhuman experience has shewn you thepossibility of what we hold.’6. καλώς ἔχειν] ‘that that you hadbetter,’ i.e. leave off contending.7. ἔγνωκας] ‘have made up yourmind.’12. You say that the Spirit isnot, in Scripture, an object ofworship. It is at least ‘in in thespirit’ that we worship, and thatwhich we worship ‘is Spirit.’ Heis so entirely one with the object ofworship, that worship addressed tothe Father is equally addressed to theHoly Ghost. Again, you object that‘all things were made through theSon,’ and therefore the Holy Ghostamong them. No more, I answer,than the Father was. He wasmade at all. Accept humbly the docmind.’trine of the unity of the Divine persons.12. ἀποδώσομεν ὕστερον] in thewhole argument, beginning with§ 21 and culminating in § 28.14. πνεῦμα γάρ, φησιν] John iv 24.16. τὸ γὰρ τί προσευξ.] Kom. viii26.19. προσεύξ. τῷ πν.] I Cor. xiv 15.τοῦτ’ ἐστίν, ἐν νοὶ καὶ πνεύματι. τὸ οὖν προσκυνεῖν τῷπνεύματι, ἢ προσεύχεσθαι, οὐδὲν ἄλλο εἶναί μοι φαίνεται,ἢ αὐτὸ ἑαυτῷ τὴν εὐχὴν προσάγειν καὶ τὴν προσκύνησιν.ὃ τίς οὐκ ἂν ἐπαινέσειε τῶν ἐνθέων, καὶ τῶν εὖ εἰδότωνὅτι καὶ ἡ τοῦ ἑνὸς προσκύνησις τῶν τριῶν ἐστὶ προσκύνησις,διὰ τὸ ἐν τοῖς τρισὶν ὁμότιμον τῆς ἀξίας καὶ τῆς θεότητος ;καὶ μὴν οὐδὲ ἐκεῖνο φοβηθήσομαι τὸ πάντα διὰ τοῦ υἱοῦγεγονέναι λέγεσθαι, ὡς ἑνὸς τῶν πάντων ὄντος καὶ τοῦἁγίου πνεύματος. πάντα γὰρ ὅσα γέγονεν, εἴρηται, οὐχἁπλῶς ἅπαντα· οὐδὲ γὰρ ὁ πατήρ, οὐδ’ ὅσα μὴ γέγονεν.δείξας οὖν ὅτι γέγονε, τότε τῷ υἱῷ δός, καὶ τοῖς κτίσμασισυναρίθμησον. ἕως δ’ ἂν μὴ τοῦτο δεικνύῃς, οὐδὲν τῷπεριληπτικῷ βοηθῇ πρὸς ἀσέβειαν. εἰ μὲν γὰρ γέγονε,διὰ χριστοῦ πάντως· οὐδὲ αὐτὸς ἀρνήσομαι. εἰ δὲ οὐγέγονε, πῶς ἢ τῶν πάντων ἕν, ἢ διὰ χριστοῦ ; παῦσαι οὖνκαὶ τὸν πατέρα κακῶς τιμῶν κατὰ τοῦ μονογενοῦς, — κακὴ δὲτιμὴ κτίσμα διδόντα τὸ τιμιώτερον υἱὸν ἀποστερεῖν, — καὶτὸν υἱὸν κατὰ τοῦ πνεύματος. οὐ γὰρ ὁμοδούλου δημιουργός,ἀλλ’ ὁμοτίμῳ συνδοξαζόμενος. μηδὲν μετὰ σεαυτοῦθῇς τῆς τριάδος, μὴ τῆς τριάδος ἐκπέσῃς. μηδενὶ περικόψῃςτὴν μίαν φύσιν καὶ ὁμοίως σεβάσμιον, ὡς ὅ τι ἂν6 om τοῖς c || 7 φοβήσομαι a || II δείξας] δεῖξον df || τότε] καὶ τότεcdf || 14 ἀρνήσωμαι d || 17 ἀποστερεῖν υἱὸν de2f1. τὸ προσκ. τῷ πν] Gr. thinksthat ‘worshipping or praying in orby the Spirit,’ which are clearlycommanded, are in fact the bringingof prayer and worship by the Spiritto Himself. This is based upon thetext first quoted, in which the objectof the worship πνεῦμά ἐστιν. Notthat Gr. definitely takes the firstπνεῦμα in that text to be the HolyGhost ; but on the principle thatworship offered to one person of theTrinity is offered to all, his reasoningis correct, if his premisses areaccepted. It must be owned, however,that he somewhat begs thequestion.7. πάντα διὰ τοῦ υἱ.] John i 3.11. τῳ υἱῷ δός] ‘assign assign Him to theSon’ as one of the things which weremade through Him.12. τῷ περιληπτικῷ] ‘your comprehensivephrase will not help you.’16. κακῶς τιμῶν κατὰ] ‘wronglyhonouring the Father at the expenseof the Only-begotten.’18. οὐ γὰρ ὁμ. δῆμ’.] sc. τοῦπνεύματος ὁ υἱός.19. μετὰ σεαυτοῦ] Cp. § 4 μετ’ἐμοῦ.τῶν τριῶν καθέλῃς, τὸ πᾶν ἔσῃ καθῃρηκώς, μᾶλλον δὲ τοῦπαντὸς ἐκπεπτωκώς. βέλτιον μικρὰν τῆς ἑνώσεως φαντασίανλαβεῖν, ἢ παντελῆ τολμῆσαι δυσσέβειαν.Ἥκει δὲ ἡμῖν ὁ λόγος ἐπ’ αὐτὸ τὸ κεφάλαιον· καὶστένω μέν, ὅτι πάλαι τεθνηκὸς ζήτημα, καὶ τῆ πίστειπαραχωρῆσαν, νῦν ἀνακαινίζεται· στῆναι δὲ ὅμως ἀναγκαῖονπρὸς τοὺς λογολέσχας, καὶ μὴ ἐρήμην ἁλῶναι, λόγονἔχοντας, καὶ συνηγοροῦντας πνεύματι. εἰ θεός, φησι, καὶθεός, καὶ θεός, πῶς οὐχὶ τρεῖς θεοί; ἢ πῶς οὐ πολυαρχίατὸ δοξαζόμενον ; ταῦτα τίνες; οἱ τελεώτεροι τὴν ἀσέβειαν,ἢ καὶ οἱ τῆς δευτέρας μερίδος, λέγω δὲ τοὺς περὶ τὸν υἱόνπὼς εὐγνώμονας ; ὁ μὲν γὰρ κοινός μοι πρὸς ἀμφοτέρουςλόγος, ὁ δὲ πρὸς τούτους ἴδιος. ὁ μὲν οὖν πρὸς τούτουςτοιοῦτος. τί φατε τοῖς τριθείταις ἡμῖν οἱ τὸν υἱὸν σέβοντες,13, 8 φησι] φασι cdf1. τὸ πᾶν ἔσῃ καθ’.] Cp. § 4.2. βέλτιον μικράν] ‘Better tohave a notion of the union,incomplete, than to venture uponsuch thorough-going ungodliness.’13. It is painful to revive along-dead controversy; but I mustdefend myself against the charge ofTritheism. It is brought against usboth by those who go all lengths inunbelief, and by some who are fairlyorthodox with regard to the Son. Tothe latter I would say that they areequally open to the charge ofDitheism.4. ἐπ’ αὐτὸ κεφ.] ‘to the fundamentalquestion itself,’ viz. howreconcile the Godhead of the ThreePersons with the unity of God.5. τῆ πίστει παραχ.] ‘that hadyielded to faith.’7. λογολέσχας] like ἀδολέσχας,‘praters.’ib. μὴ ἐρ. ἁλῶναι] a law term,freq. in Demosth., ‘to have judgmentgiven against us by default.’agrees with δίκην understood, whichis a kind of cognate ace. alterἁλῶναι.ib. λόγον ἔχ.] used m a kind ofdouble sense, which after all is butone; ‘to have the Word,’ andhave reason.’9. πολυαρχία τὸ δ.] ‘how can theobject which you glorify not be polytheistic?’Cp. iii 2.10. ταῦτα τίνες·] ‘who is it thatsays this? Is it those who go thewhole length of ungodliness?’ i.e.Arians and the Eunomians? ‘or isit, as may well be the case (καί),who belong to the second division,and are more or less right-mindedwith regard to the Son?’ Cp. § 1περὶ τὸν υἱὸν μετριάζοντες. Gr. asks,because part of his argument willapply to both sections, and part —that which comes next — only to thelatter.14. τί φατε] ‘What do you sayto us Tritheists?’ i.e. What argumentcan you urge against us, whomyou call Tritheists, which will notequally apply to yourselves, whoworship the Son, even if you havedeparted from the Spirit?εἰ καὶ τοῦ πνεύματος ἀφεστήκατε ; ὑμεῖς δὲ οὐ διθεῖται ;εἰ μὲν γὰρ ἀρνεῖσθε καὶ τοῦ μονογενοῦς τὴν προσκύνησιν,σαφῶς τέταχθε μετὰ τῶν ἐναντίων· καὶ τί φιλανθρωπευόμεθαπρὸς ὑμᾶς ὡς οὐ πάντῃ νενεκρωμένους ; εἰ δὲ σέβεσθε,καὶ μέχρι τούτου διάκεισθε σωτηρίως, ὑμᾶς ἐρωτήσομεν·τίς ὁ λόγος τῆς διθείασ ὑμῖν, ἂν τοῦτο ἐγκαλῆσθε ; εἰ ἔστιλόγος συνέσεως, ἀποκρίθητε, δότε καὶ ἡμῖν ὁδὸν ἀποκρίσεως.οἷς γὰρ ἂν ὑμεῖς τὴν διθείαν ἀποκρούσησθε λόγοις, οὗτοικαὶ ἡμῖν κατὰ τῆς τριθείασ ἀρκέσουσι. καὶ οὕτω νικῶμεν,ὑμῖν τοῖς κατηγόροις συνηγόροις χρώμενοι· οὗ τίγενναιοτερον ;Ὁ δὲ κοινὸς ἡμῖν πρὸς ἀμφοτέρους τίς ἀγών τεκαὶ λόγος; ἡμῖν εἷς θεός, ὅτι μία θεότης· καὶ πρὸς ἓν τὰἐξ αὐτοῦ τὴν ἀναφορὰν ἔχει, κἂν τρία πιστεύηται. οὐ γὰρτὸ μὲν μᾶλλον, τὸ δὲ ἦττον θεός· οὐδὲ τὸ μὲν πρότερον, τὸδὲ ὕστερον· οὐδὲ βουλήσει τέμνεται, οὐδὲ δυνάμει μερίζεται,,4 νενεκρωμένων b || 5 ἐρωτήσωμεν ab 14. 13 λόγος] + ἐστιν b ||14 πιστεύητε a3. φιλάνθρωπ’.] ‘deal tenderlywith you.’6. ὁ λόγος τῆς διθ. ὑμῖν] ‘whatdefence do you offer for your ditheism,if you are charged with it?’7. λόγος συνέσεως] an expressionformed on the model of λόγος σοφίας,γνώσεως, 1 Cor. xii 8.10. ὑμῖν τοῖς κ. σ. χρ.] ‘by theof you our accusers.’14. To both parties I answerthus. There is but one God, andone Godhead; and though there arethree Persons, there is but one Sourcefrom which all that belongs to theGodhead issues. Between these threePersons there is no kind οἱ divisionor inequality, as there is between thespecimens of a limited class.13. εἷς θεός, ὅτι μ. θ.] ‘There isbut one God, because there is onlyone thing that can be called Godhead.’If there could be differentkinds of Godhead, we might imaginemany Gods; but as the thingis necessarily unique, we cannotconceive of it as the possession ofseveral personages independenteach other. This argument, ofcourse, is based on philosophicalgrounds, not on divine revelation ;but it bears witness to the reasonadvocacyableness of that revelation.ib. πρὸς ἐν τὰ ἐξ αὐτοῦ] Cp. iii2 πρὸς τὸ ἐν τῶν ἐξ αὐτοῦ σύννευσις.The personalities issuing from asingle source are referred back tothat source so as to be but onewith it, although we recognise thatthey are three. The αὐτοῦ is neuter.It refers to ἔν.15. τὸ μὲν μᾶλλον] The Benedictineeditors compare Leo Serm. viiiin Nat. Chr. ‘gradus in uera diuinitateesse non possunt. quidquiddeo minus est, deus non est.οὐδέ τι τῶν ὅσα τοῖς μεριστοῖς ὑπάρχει, κἀνταῦθα λαβεῖνἐστίν· ἀλλὰ ἀμέριστος ἐν μεμερισμένοις, εἰ δεῖ συντόμωςεἰπεῖν, ἡ θεότης· καὶ οἷον ἐν ἡλίοις τρισὶν ἐχομένοιςἀλλήλων, μία τοῦ φωτὸς σύγκρασις. ὅταν μὲν οὖν πρὸςτὴν θεότητα βλέψωμεν, καὶ τὴν πρώτην αἰτίαν, καὶ τὴνμοναρχίαν, ἓν ἡμῖν τὸ φανταζόμενον· ὅταν δὲ πρὸς τὰ ἐνοἷς ἡ θεότης, καὶ τὰ ἐκ τῆς πρώτης αἰτίας ἀχρόνως ἐκεῖθενὄντα καὶ ὁμοδόξως, τρία τὰ προσκυνούμενα.Τί δέ, οὐχὶ καὶ παρ’ Ἕλλησι, φαῖεν ἄν, μίαθεότης, ὡς οἱ τὰ τελεώτερα παρ’ ἐκείνοις φιλοσοφοῦντες,καὶ παρ’ ἡμῖν ἀνθρωπότης μία, τὸ γένος ἅπαν ; ἀλλ’ ὅμωςπολλοὶ θεοί, καὶ οὐχ εἷς, ὡς δὲ καὶ ἄνθρωποι; ἀλλ’ ἐκεῖμὲν ἡ κοινότης τὸ ἓν ἔχει μόνον ἐπινοίᾳ θεωρητόν· τὰ δὲI μεριστοις] μερισταῖς b 15. 12 θέοι πολλοὶ df || δε] δὴ df1. οὐδέ τι τῶν ὅσα] ‘nor are any ofthe distinguishing marks of separateindividualities to be found there,’in the Godhead.2. ἀμέριστος ἐν μεμ.] ‘ butas the Persons are, the entire andundivided Godhead is in each. ’ Thepassage is incorporated without commentby Jo. Damasc. de Fide Orth.viii.3. ἐν ἡλίοις τρίσιν] The illustrationtration only shews the impossibilityof illustration. ‘There suns joinedto each other’ might appear to usone, but their relation to each otherwould be very different from thatof the Three Divine Persons.6. τὸ φανταζόμενον] The worddoes not imply that our observationis untrue, but only that it is (necessarily)inadequate. Cp. e.g. ii 618, 19.ib. πρὸς τὰ ἐν οἷς ἢ θ.] ‘ at thePersons in which the Divine natureresides, and which issue from theFirst Cause, deriving from it Theirexistence above all time and withan equality of glory, there areThree objects for our adoration.’avoids saying τρεῖς οἱ προσκ., notonly, as so freq., for the sake ofreverence, but because it sounds atfirst as if the three were ‘separateindividualities’ like ourselves.also has its dangers, as possibly suggestingdifferences of nature ; but inthe context this danger is removed.It is possible that Gr. here meansto speak of the Father Himself as ἐκτῆς πρώτης αἰτίας; but. if so, thatπρώτη αἰτία is within Himself. Heis the source of His own being.15. The Greeks, it is true, spokeof α single Divine nature, compatiblewith plurality ; ἃς is the casealso with human nature. But inthese cases, each individual has buta fragment of the whole nature,varies, not only from all other partakersof it, but from himself also, bychange. This holds true even ofangels.13. μόνον ἐπινοίᾳ θ.] In the caseof the heathen polytheism, the commonGodhead exists only as a conceptionor generalisation of thephilosopher; it has no existence infact. Each individual deity differsgreatly from the other in history,and character, and capacities. Thesame holds true of the specimenman in relation to the human genus.καθ’ ἕκαστον πλεῖστον ἀλλήλων καὶ τῷ χρόνῳ καὶ τοῖςπάθεσι καὶ τῇ δυνάμει μεμερισμένα. ἡμεῖς τε γὰρ οὐσύνθετοι μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀντίθετοι καὶ ἀλλήλοις καὶ ἡμῖναὐτοῖς, οὐδὲ ἐπὶ μιᾶς ἡμέρας οἱ αὐτοὶ καθαρῶς μένοντες,μὴ ὅτι τὸν ἅπαντα βίον, ἀλλὰ καὶ σώμασι καὶ ψυχαῖς ἀεὶῥέοντές τε καὶ μεταπίπτοντες. οὐκ οἶδα δέ, εἰ μὴ καὶἄγγελοι καὶ πᾶσα φύσις ἡ ἄνω μετὰ τὴν τριάδα, κἂνἁπλοῖ τινὲς ὦσι, καὶ πρὸς τὸ καλὸν παγιώτεροι τῆ πρὸςτὸ ἄκρον καλὸν ἐγγύτητι.Οἵ τε παρ’ Ἑλλήνων σεβόμενοι θεοί τε καὶδαίμονες, ὡς αὐτοὶ λέγουσιν, οὐδὲν ἡμῶν δέονται κατηγόρων,ἀλλὰ τοῖς σφῶν αὐτῶν ἁλίσκονται θεολόγοις, ὡςμὲν ἐμπαθεῖς, ὡς δὲ στασιώδεις, ὅσων δὲ κακῶν γέμοντεςκαὶ μεταβολῶν, καὶ οὐ πρὸς ἀλλήλους μόνον ἀλλὰ καὶπρὸς τὰς πρώτας αἰτίας ἀντιθέτως ἔχοντες, οὓς δὴ᾿Ωκεανούς, καὶ Τηθύας, καὶ Φάνητας, καὶ οὐκ οἶδα οὕς4 καθαρῶς μένοντες οἱ αὐτοὶ df || 7 ἄνω) + καὶ bdf 16. 15 ovs] + καὶe || 16 ὠκεανοὺς] + τε b2, οὐ σύνθετοι μόνον] We arenot only composite beings, made upof body and soul, and each of thesefactors again resoluble into differentcomponent parts ; we are beings ofopposite characteristics, — not onlyas compared with each other, but ascompared with our own fluctuatingand inconstant selves.5. μὴ ὅτι] Cp. i 4.6. ῥέοντες] Cp. § 10 ῥευστῆς.ib. καὶ ἄγγελοι] They, thoughcomparatively ἁπλοῖ, not σύνθετοι,and though less liable than we areto change and inconsistency, are yetnot one, like the Persons of theGodhead. They are independentof each other, and vary in powersand in character.7. φύσις ἢ ἄνω μετὰ τ. τ.] Cp.ii 31 ταῖς πρώταις μετὰ θεὸν φύσεσι.The whole section should be comparedwith this passage.16. The divisions among themany ‘Gods’ of the Greeks arenotorious. They are at shamefulvariance. Their empire is partitionedout. Not so with our God.Each of the three Persons is absolutelyone with Himself and no lessabsolutely one with the others.12. ἁλίσκονται] Cp. ἑ 13 ἁλῶναι,‘to be convicted. ’ib. θεολόγοις] Cp. ii 4. Theref. is, no doubt, esp. to Plato’sdenuntiation of the poets in Rep. ii,iii.15. οὓς δὴ ᾿Ωκ.] The ‘FirstCayses,’ i.e. the originalagainst which the others turn, arecalled Oceanus, and Tethys, and soon. See Horn. Il. xiv 201.16. φάνητας] “A mysticin the Orphic rites, representing thefirst principle of the world, cf. Orph.Arg. 15 ” (Lidd. and Sc).τινας ὀνομάζουσι· καὶ τελευταῖόν τινα θεὸν μισότεκνονδιὰ φιλαρχίαν, πάντας καταπίνοντα τοὺς ἄλλους ἐξἀπληστίας, ἵνα γένηται πάντων ἀνδρῶν τε θεῶν τε πατήρ,δυστυχῶς ἐσθιομένων καὶ ἐμουμένων. εἰ δὲ ταῦτα μῦθοικαὶ ὑπόνοιαί τινες, ὡς αὐτοί φασι, τὸ αἰσχρὸν τοῦ λόγουδιαδιδράσκοντες, τί φήσουσι πρὸς τό, Τριχθὰ δὲ πάνταδέδασται, καὶ τὸ ἄλλον ἄλλῳ τινὶ τῶν ὄντων ἐπιστατεῖν,διῃρημένους καὶ ταῖς ὕλαις καὶ τοῖς ἀξιώμασι; τὸ δὲἡμέτερον οὐ τοιοῦτον· οὐδὲ αὕτη μερὶς τῷ Ἰακώβ, φησινὁ ἐμὸς θεολόγος· ἀλλὰ τὸ ἓν ἕκαστον αὐτῶν ἔχει πρὸς τὸσυγκείμενον οὐχ ἧττον ἢ πρὸς ἑαυτό, τῷ ταὐτῷ τῆς οὐσίαςκαὶ τῆς δυνάμεως. καὶ οὗτος ὁ τῆς ἑνώσεως λόγος, ὅσονἐφ᾿ οἷς ἡμεῖς κατειλήφαμεν. εἰ μὲν οὖν οὗτος ἰσχυρὸςὁ λόγος, τῷ θεῷ χάρις τῆς θεωρίας· εἰ δὲ μή, ζητῶμεντὸν ἰσχυρότερον.Τοὺς δὲ σοὺς λόγους οὐκ οἶδα πότερον παίζοντοςεἶναι φήσομεν, ἢ σπουδάζοντος, οἷς ἀναιρεῖς ἡμῶν τὴνἕνωσιν. τίς γὰρ δὴ καὶ ὁ λόγος ; τὰ ὁμοούσια συναριθμεῖταl,φησι· συναρίθμησιν λέγων τὴν εἰς ἀριθμὸν ἕνα4 υπονοια (sic) και μυθοι τινες df || 13 εφ οις] εν οις d || ισχυρος ουτος df17. 17 φησομεν] φησαιμεν b || 19 φησι] φης f1. θεὸν μισότεκνον] Saturn.5. ὑπόνοιαί τινες] ‘a sort ofallegoriest.’6. τριχθὰ δὲ πάντα δ.] Hom.II. xv 189.8. ταῖς ὕλαις κ. τ. ἀξ.] ‘havingseparate elements under them, andholding different ranks.’ib. τὸ ἡμέτερον] ‘what we believe.’9. μερὶς τῷ Ἰακώβ] Jer. x 16.10. τὸ ἓν ἕκαστον κτλ] ‘but eachof the Three Persons is as entirelyone with Those with whom He isconnected, as He is with Himself,because of the identity of essence andof power that is between Them.’14. χάρις τῆς θεωρίας] ‘thanksbe to God for the line of thought.’17. It is said that things of thesame nature are numbered together,so that if the three Persons are consubstantialthey must be three Gods.For fear of saying this, you denythe Godhead of two of them, whichis like cutting your throat for fearof dying.18. τὰ ὀμ. συναριθμεῖται] Thingsof the same nature, like men, trees,or horses, come under a numberwhich sums them up, as three trees,four horses, five men ; you cannot,acc. to the disputant, apply them toheterogeneous things, and class atree, a horse, and a man togetheras being three. Cp. Bas. de Sp. S.17.συναίρεσιν· οὐ συναριθμεῖται δὲ τὰ μὴ ὁμοούσια· ὥστεὑμεῖς μὲν οὐ φεύξεσθε τὸ τρεῖς λέγειν θεοὺς κατὰ τὸνλόγον τοῦτον· ἡμῖν δὲ οὐδὲ εἷς κίνδυνος· οὐ γὰρ ὁμοούσιαλέγομεν. σὺ μὲν οὖν ἀπήλλαξας σεαυτὸν πραγμάτων μιᾷφωνῇ, καὶ τὴν κακὴν νίκην νενίκηκας· ὅμοιόν τι ποιήσαςτοῖς διὰ θανάτου φόβον ἀπαγχομένοις. ἵνα γὰρ μὴ κάμῃςτῇ μοναρχίᾳ συνιστάμενος, ἠρνήσω θεότητα, καὶ προδέδωκαςτοῖς ἐχθροῖς τὸ ζητούμενον. ἐγὼ δὲ κἄν τι δέῃ καμεῖν, οὐπροήσομαι τὸ προσκυνούμενον. ἐνταῦθα δὲ οὐδὲ ὁρῶ τίςο πόνος.Συναριθμεῖται, φής, τὰ ὁμοούσια· τὰ δὲ μὴ οὕτωςἔχοντα μοναδικὴν ἔχει τὴν δήλωσιν. πόθεν σοι τοῦτο, καὶπαρὰ τίνων δουματιστῶν καὶ μυθολόγων ; ἢ ἀγνοεῖς, ὅτιπᾶς ἀριθμὸς τῆς ποσότητος τῶν ὕπο κε ὑποκειμένων μέν ὢν ἐστὶ δηλωτικός,οὐ τῆς φύσεως τῶν πραγμάτων ; ἐγὼ δὲ οὕτωςἀρχαίως ἔχω, μᾶλλον δὲ ἀμαθῶς, ὥστε τρία μὲν ὀνομάζωτὰ τοσαῦτα τῷ ἀριθμῷ, κἂν διέστηκε τὴν φύσιν· ἓν δέ, καὶἕν, καὶ ἕν, ἄλλως τὰς τοσαύτας μονάδας, κἂν τῇ οὐσία1 λεγειν τρεῖς df. 18. 11 μὴ] οὐχ bdf || 13 καὶ] η b1. ὥστε ὑμεῖς μέν] These arestill the words of the opponent,down to λέγομεν. On the principlejust laid down, he says, if theFather, the Son, and the Spirit canbe called three at all, it can only beas three Gods ; that is, your doctrineis incurably tritheistic Oursis not, he adds ; for we deny theidentity of essence, and make noat bringing those beingstogether under a number.4. πραγμάτων] ‘of trouble’; notτῶν πρ., ‘the facts.’7. τῆ μ. συνιστάμενος] ‘to saveyourself labour in maintainingmonotheism you have denied theGodhead, and abandoned to theenemy the very thing which youare seeking to establish.’18. I do not know zvhere you getyour rule from. To To me, a numberonly says how many things thereare, and tells anothing about theirnature. Certainly in the Bible,things of different natures aresummed up under a common number.12. μοναδικὴν ἔχει τ. δ.] ‘can onlybe designated singly’; e.g. aand a man, and a tree.13. δόγμ’. καὶ μυθ.] a kind ofhendiadys, ‘makers of fabidous deattemptcrees.’14. τῆς πόσ’. τῶν ὑποκ.] ‘denotesthe quantity, or sum, of theand not their nature.’15. οὕτως ἀρχ’. ἔχω] ‘am am old-fashioned enough ’ to say ‘three’when there are three things, evenwhen they are not of the samekind, and to name them singly, ifI choose, even when theythinking only of their number andnot of their nature.18. ἄλλως] carries on the irony ofἀρχαίως, ἀμαθῶς. It is used in theidiomatic sense of ‘idlt,’ ‘vainly.’συνάπτωνται, οὐ πρὸς τὰ πράγματα μᾶλλον ἀφορῶν, ἢ τὸπόσον τῶν πραγμάτων, καθ’ ὧν ἡ ἀρίθμησις. ἐπεὶ δὲ λίανπεριέχῃ τοῦ γράμματος, καίτοι γε πολεμῶν τῷ γράμματι,ἐκεῖθέν μοι λάβε τὰς ἀποδείξεις. τρία ἐν ταῖς παροιμίαιςἐστίν, ἃ εὐόδως πορεύεται, λέων, καὶ τράγος, καὶ ἁλεκτρυών·καὶ βασιλεὺς δημηγορῶν ἐν ἔθνει τὸ τέταρτον· ἵνα μὴλέγω τὰς ἄλλας ἐκεῖ τετράδας ἀριθμουμένας, τῆ φύσει δὲδιῃρημένας. καὶ δύο τῷ Μωυσεῖ χερουβὶμ εὑρίσκω μοναδικῶςἀριθμούμενα. πῶς οὖν ἢ ἐκεῖνα τρία, κατὰ τὴν σὴντεχνολογίαν, τοσοῦτον ἀλλήλων ἀπερρηγμένα ταῖς φύσεσιν·ἢ ταῦτα μοναδικά, τοσοῦτον ἀλλήλοις ὁμοφυῆ καὶ συγκείμενα ;εἰ γὰρ λέγοιμι θεὸν καὶ μαμωνᾶν δύο κυρίους εἰς ἓνἀριθμουμένους, τοσούτῳ μακρὰν ὄντας ἀλλήλων, τάχα ἃνκαὶ μᾶλλον γελασθείην τῆς συναριθμήσεως.Ἀλλ’ ἐμοί, φησιν, ἐκεῖνα συναριθμούμενα λέγεται,καὶ τῆς αὐτῆς οὐσίας, οἷς συνεκφωνεῖται καταλλήλως καὶ3 γραμματι] πράγματι b || 5 λέων και] om καὶ g || 6 ενδημηγορων e ||7 τῆ ’δε φύσει bdf3. περιέχῃ τοῦ γρ.] ‘you are soattached to the letter of Scripture.’The emendation τῷ πράγματι in thenext clause is ingenious and tempting;but τῷ γράμματι will meanthat in this instance they havethe very letter of Scripture againstthem, — as he proceeds to shew.4. λάβε] seems to be an ironicalinvitation to prove the point, not=δέξαι i.e. ‘listen to my proofs.’5. εὐόδως πορεύεται] Pro v. xxx29.8. δύο Χερουβὶμ] Ex. xxv 18,19. If τῷ M. = ‘ by Moses,’ perh.the ref. is rather to Ex. xxxvii 7 ;but it may be the strict dat.,‘reckoned up singly to Moses.’10. ἀπερρηγμένα] ’so completelysevered.’14. καἰ μᾶλλον γελ.] The sameirony continued ; ‘I should be stillmore laughed at for my mode ofnumbering things together. ’ Matt.vi 24. Gr. does not observe thatGod and Mammon are not actuallydescribed as two masters, and thatif they were, it would be ἃς mastersthat they would be numbered together,in which respect they arealike.19. If you tell me that numbersdenote things of one nature and thoseonly, then I will deny that you cansay ‘three men,’ unless eachthree is an exact repetition of theothers. St John was certainly notbound by your rule when he spoke ofthe three witnesses nor will itwhen you come to speak of thingsof different natures but bearing thesame name.16. οἷς συνεκφ. καταλλ. κ. τ. ὀ.]The opponent explains thatthings ranged under a number, becausethey are of the same nature.he means cases where the noun isexpressed and the numeral agreeswith it (oἷς i.e. συναριθμουμένοιςpractically = ‘ the numeral’), like‘three men,’ ‘three God.’ He doesnot mean that you can never lumptogether under a neuter numeralheterogeneous objects as so many‘things.’ This, he says, is not aconnumeration.τὰ ὀνόματα· οἷον, ἄνθρωποι τρεῖς, καὶ θεοὶ τρεῖς, οὐχὶ τρίατάδε καὶ τάδε. τίς γὰρ ἢ ἀντίδοσις ; τοῦτο νομοθετοῦντόςἐστι τοῖς ὀνόμασιν, οὐκ ἀληθεύοντος. ἐπεὶ κἀμοὶ Πέτρος,καὶ Παῦλος, καὶ Ἰωάννης, οὐ τρεῖς, οὐδὲ ὁμοούσιοι, ἕως ἂνμὴ τρεῖς Παῦλοι, καὶ τρεῖς Πέτροι, καὶ Ἰωάνναι τοσοῦτοιλέγωνται. ὃ γὰρ σὺ τετήρηκας ἐπὶ τῶν γενικωτέρων ὀνομάτων,τοῦτο καὶ ἡμεῖς ἀπαιτήσομεν ἐπὶ τῶν εἰδικωτέρωνκατὰ τὴν σὴν ἀνάπλασιν. ἢ ἀδικήσεις, μὴ διδοὺς ὅπερεἴληφας ; τί δὲ ὁ Ἰωάννης, τρεῖς εἶναι τοὺς μαρτυροῦνταςλέγων ἐν ταῖς καθολικαῖς, τὸ πνεῦμα, τὸ ὕδωρ, τὸ αἷμα ;ἆρά σοι ληρεῖν φαίνεται, πρῶτον μὲν ὅτι τὰ μὴ ὁμοούσιασυναριθμῆσαι τετόλμηκεν, ὃ τοῖς ὁμοουσίοις σὺ δίδως, — τίςγὰρ ἂν εἴποι ταῦτα μιᾶς οὐσίασ ; — δεύτερον δὲ ὅτι μὴκαταλλήλως ἔχων ἀπήντησεν, ἀλλὰ τὸ τρεῖς ἀρρενικῶςπροθείς, τὰ τρία οὐδετέρως ἐπήνεγκε, παρὰ τοὺς σοὺς καὶτῆς σῆς γραμματικῆς ὅρους καὶ νόμους ; καίτοι τί διαφέρει,ἢ τρεῖς προθέντα ἓν καὶ ἓν καὶ ἓν ἐπενεγκεῖν, ἢ ἕνα καὶ19. 1 καὶ θεοι] om καὶ b || 5 παυλοι... πέτροι transp. def || 6 λέγονταιace || 7 ἀπαιτήσωμεν a || 10 ἐν] ἔπι f || πνεῦμα] + καὶ b || ὕδωρ] + καὶ b ||15 προθεις] προσθεὶς e || 16 om σὴς aeg2. τίς γὰρ ἢ ἀντίδοσις;] This isexplained by the words below,ἀδικήσεις, μὴ διδοὺς ὅπερ εἴληφας;It is Gr.’s reply to the objector.‘What,’ he asks, ‘shall I make yougive me in return?’ The γὰρimplies a suppressed ‘Take care!’ib. τοῦτο νομοθ. ἐστι] ‘This,’Gr. retorts, ‘is to legislate for Ian-guage, not to state the facts withregard to it.’ At that rate, he canrefuse to admit that Peter and Pauland John are three beings of thesame nature ; he may say thatunless all the peculiarities ofare exactly reproduced, so thatthere are three Peters, there is notsufficient correspondence betweenPeter and the others to warranttheir being brought under a singlenumber as three men.6. γενικωτέρων] ‘generic’ as opexplaniedposed to εἰδικός ‘specific.’ Gr. putsboth words in the comp., becausehe does not use them in astrict sense.9. τρεῖς εἶναι τοὺς μ.] I John v 8.13. μὴ καταλλ. ἔχων ἀπ’. ]he coines forward without putting hiswords in grammatical agreement.’᾿Αρρενικῶς, ‘in the ’; οὐδετέρως,‘in the meut.’ἕνα καὶ ἕνα λέγοντα μὴ τρεῖς ἀλλὰ τρία προσαγορεύειν ;ὅπερ αὐτὸς ἀπαξιοῖς ἐπὶ τῆς θεότητος. τί δέ σοι ὁ καρκίνοςτό τε ζῶον, τό τε ὄργανον, ὅ τε ἀστήρ ; τί δὲ ὁ κύων,ὅ τε χερσαῖος, καὶ ὁ ἔνυδρος, καὶ ὁ οὐράνιος ; οὐ τρεῖςλέγεσθαί σοι δοκοῦσι καρκίνοι καὶ κύνες ; πάντως γε. ἆραοὖν παρὰ τοῦτο καὶ ὁμοούσιοι ; τίς φήσει τῶν νοῦν ἐχόντων ;ὁρᾷς ὅπως σοι διαπέπτωκεν ὁ περὶ τῆς συναριθμήσεωςλόγος, τοσούτοις ἐληλεγμένος ; εἰ γὰρ μήτε τὰ ὁμοούσιαπάντως συναριθμεῖται, καὶ συναριθμεῖται τὰ μὴ ὁμοούσια,ἥ τε τῶν ὀνομάτων συνεκφώνησις ἐπ’ ἀμφοῖν, τί σοι πλέονὧν ἐδογμάτισας ;Σκοπῶ δὲ κἀκεῖνο, καὶ ἴσως οὐκ ἔξω λόγου. τὸἓν καὶ τὸ ἓν οὐκ εἰς δύο συντίθεται ; τὰ δύο δὲ οὐκ εἰς ἓνκαὶ ἓν ἀναλύεται ; δῆλον ὅτι. εἰ οὖν ὁμοούσια μὲν τὰ συντιθέμενακατὰ τὸν σὸν λόγον, ἑτεροούσια δὲ τὰ τεμνόμενα,τί συμβαίνει ; τὰ αὐτὰ ὁμοούσιά τε εἶναι καὶ ἑτεροούσια.γελῶ σου καὶ τὰς προαριθμήσεις, καὶ τὰς ὑπαριθμήσεις,20. 16 om τε f3. τό τε ὄργανον] a pair of tongs.8. ἐληλεγμένος] from ἐλέγχω.10. ἢ τε τῶν ὁ. συνεκφ.] ‘and thenouns are expressed in both cases,along with the numeral,’ i.e. notmerely ‘understood.’ Or. meansboth in the case of ὁμοούσια whichare not numbered together, and inthat of οὐχ ὁμοούσια which are.20. It will not bear the simplesttest of addition or division. Yourrules about the order of enumeration,and about the use of prepositions,are just as ridiculous. We willnow proceed to give you the coup degrace.13. οὐκ εἰς δύο συντ.] ‘one andone make two,’ although ace. to theheretic’s logic ‘one and one’ wouldonly be said of things of differentnature, such as could never beunited under a common numeral.Conversely ‘two is divided into oneand οne,’ although ‘two’ can onlybe said of things of the same nature,which it would be unnatural todescribe in that single fashion. Theupshot is that the same thingsproved to be of the same nature andof different natures. Of course theargument is more or less of a pieceof banter.17. προαριθμ. κ. ὑπαριθμ.] Eliassays, probably without historicalgrounds, that this system of numbering(δεύτερος θεός, τρίτος θεός)was derived from the way in whichthe Neoplatonic writers arrangedexistences according to a scale, fromthe First Cause to the lowest. Thephraseology is fully discussed byBasil l. c. (de Sp. S. 17.)῾Υπαριθμεῖν’,as distinguished from συναριθμ.,is to reckon in a secondary position.αἷς σὺ μέγα φρονεῖς, ὥσπερ ἐν τῇ τάξει τῶν ὀνομάτωνκειμένων τῶν πραγμάτων. εἰ γὰρ τοῦτο, τί κωλύει κατὰτὸν αὐτὸν λόγον, ἐπειδὴ τὰ αὐτὰ καὶ προαριθμεῖται καὶὑπαριθμεῖται παρὰ τῇ γραφῇ διὰ τὴν ἰσοτιμίαν τῆςφύσεως, αὐτὰ ἑαυτῶν εἶναι τιμιώτερά τε καὶ ἀτιμότερα ;ὁ δὲ αὐτός μοι καὶ περὶ τῆς Θεὸς φωνῆς καὶ Κύριος λόγος·ἔτι δὲ τῶν προθέσεων, τῆς ἐξ οὗ, καὶ δι’ οὗ, καὶ ἐν ᾧ, αἷςσὺ κατατεχνολογεῖς ἡμῖν τὸ θεῖον, τὴν μὲν τῷ πατρὶ διδούς,τὴν δὲ τῷ υἱῷ, τὴν δὲ τῷ ἁγίῳ πνεύματι. τί γὰρ ἂνἐποίησας, παγίως ἑκάστου τούτων ἑκάστῳ νενεμημένου·ὁπότε πάντων πᾶσι συντεταγμένων, ὡς δῆλον τοῖς φιλοπόνοις,τοσαύτην σὺ διὰ τούτων εἰσάγεις καὶ τῆς ἀξίαςκαὶ τῆς φύσεως ἀνισότητα; ἀπόχρη καὶ ταῦτα τοῖς μὴλίαν ἀγνώμοσιν. ἐπεὶ δέ σε τῶν χαλεπῶν ἐστίν, ἅπαξἐπιπηδήσαντα τῷ πνεύματι, τῆς φορᾶς σχεθῆναι, ἁλλὰ μή,καθάπερ τῶν συῶν τοὺς θρασυτέρους, εἰς τέλος φιλονεικεῖν,καὶ πρὸς τὸ ξίφος ὠθίζεσθαι, μέχρις ἂν πᾶσαν εἴσω τὴνπληγὴν ὑπολάβῃς , φέρε, σκεψώμεθα τίς ἔτι σοι λείπεταιλόγος.4 τῆ] + θεια bdf || 14 ἔπει] ἐπειδὴ dt || 18 ὑπολάβοις c1. ὥσπερ...πραγμάτων] ‘as as if therealities themselves (i.e. the Personsof the Trinity) depended upon theorder in which they are named.’3. καὶ προαριθμ. καὶ ὑπαριθμ.]‘are sometimes enumerated in oneorder and sometimes in another’;e.g. 2 Cor. xiii 14.6. π. τῆς θεὸς φ. καὶ κύριος]‘The same observation holds good’of these, not in regard to the orderin which they are placed, but to theway in which they are applied tothe Divine Persons as it were indiscriminately.7. τῶν προθέσεων] ‘the prepositions.’8. κατατεχνολογεῖς ἤμ’. τὸ θ.] ‘tiedown the Godhead with your canons.’Basil de Sp. S. 2 ascribes the canonto Aetius.9. τί γὰρ ἂγ ἐποίησας] Α veryironical argument. If, when theseprepositions are used interchangeably,you contrive to get such inequalityout of them, what wouldyou not have done if the use ofthem had been constant andable? Ὁπότε is used here like ὅστιςwith an inferential shade of meaning.13. καὶ ταῦτα] ‘even even these things,’i.e. without going further.14. τῶν χαλεπῶν ἐστίν] ‘is adifficulty.’15. τῆς φορᾶς σχεθῆναι] ‘to stopshort in your impetus.’21. You speak of the silence ofScripture on the Godhead of theGhost. Scholars have often shownhoto false this is; but I too will domy best to help you out of yourdifficulty.Πάλιν καὶ πολλάκις ἀνακυκλεῖς ἡμῖν τὸ ἄγραφον.ὅτι μὲν οὖν οὐ ξένον τοῦτο, οὐδὲ παρείσακτον, ἀλλὰ καὶτοῖς πάλαι καὶ τοῖς νῦν γνωριζόμενον καὶ παραγυμνούμενον,δέδεικται μὲν ἤδη πολλοῖς τῶν περὶ τούτου διειληφότων,ὅσοι μὴ ῥᾳθύμως μηδὲ παρέργως ταῖς θείαις γραφαῖς ἐντυχόντες,ἀλλὰ διασχόντες τὸ γράμμα καὶ εἴσω παρακύψαντες,τὸ ἀπόθετον κάλλος ἰδεῖν ἠξιώθησαν, καὶ τῷφωτισμῷ τῆς γνώσεως κατηυγάσθησαν. δηλώσομεν δὲκαἰ ἡμεῖς ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς, ὅσον ἐνδέχεται, τοῦ μὴ δοκεῖν εἶναιπεριττοί τινες, μηδὲ φιλοτιμότεροι τοῦ δέοντος, ἐποικοδομοῦντεςἐπὶ θεμέλιον ἀλλότριον. εἰ δὲ τὸ μὴ λίαν σαφῶςγεγράφθαι θεὸν μηδὲ πολλάκις ὀνομαστί, ὥσπερ τὸνπατέρα πρότερον καὶ τὸν υἱὸν ὕστερον, αἴτιόν σοι γίνεταιβλασφημίας, καὶ τῆς περιττῆς ταύτης γλωσσαλγίας καὶἀσεβείας, ἡμεῖς σοι λύσομεν ταύτην τὴν βλάβην, μικρὰπερὶ πραγμάτων καὶ ὀνομάτων καὶ μάλιστα παρὰ τῆ τῆςγραφῆς συνηθείᾳ φιλοσοφήσαντες.21. 1 ανακυκλοις b ‘Reg. b’ || 5 εντυχοντες] ἐντυγχάνοντες b ‘Colb.3’ || 8 δηλώσωμεν aef || 10 εποικοδομουντες] οἰκοδομοῦντες acg1. τὸ ἄγραφον] Cp. § 1.2. οὐ ξένον τοῦτο] τοῦτο seemsby comparison with § 1 to mean theHoly Spirit Himself, not the doctrineof His Godhead. So also περὶ τού.του below.3. τοῖς πάλαι] the O.T. writers;τοῖς νῦν, the Christian Church.ib. παραγυμνούμενον] ‘revealed,’‘disclosed.’4. διειληφότων] ‘have discussed.’Cp. iv 16, v 5.5. ἐντυχόντες] to ‘meet with,’‘come across’; so to ‘read.’ Theword does not necessarily imply acasual, hasty perusal; cp. § 26.6. διασχόντες] Cp. ii 3, 31,‘have penetrated beyond the letter.’7. ἀπόθετον] ‘put away,’ so‘hidden’ like a treasure, = ἀπόκρυφον.See Thompson’s note on Plat.Phaedr. 252 B.9. ἐξ ἐπιδρομῆς] lit. ‘at a rush,’i.e. ‘hastily.’ib. τοῦ μὴ δοκεῖν] explains whyGr. will not attempt to go into thequestion at greater length.11. ἐπὶ θέμ’. ἀλλ’] Rom. xv 20.Because Basil and others had goneover the ground before.12. ὀνομαστί] The word appearsto belong to both σαφῶς and πολλά.κὶς, and to qualify the wordnot τὸ ἄγ. πνεῦμα understood; ‘thefact that He is not very clearly,often, described in Scripture bytitle of “God”.’ But the expressionis somewhat redundant.13. πρότερρον] under the earlierdispensation; ὕστ., under the later.15. λύσομεν…βλάβην] ‘will removethis disadvantage’; saida kind of irony, as if the opponentwould recognise that it was a βλάβη.τῶν πραγμάτων τὰ μὲν οὐκ ἔστι, λέγεται δέ· τὰδὲ ὄντα οὐ λέγεται· τὰ δὲ οὔτε ἔστιν, οὔτε λέγεται· τὰ δὲἄμφω, καὶ ἔστι, καὶ λέγεται. τούτων ἀπαιτεῖς με τὰςἀποδείξεις ; παρασχεῖν ἕτοιμος. ὑπνοῖ τῆ γραφῇ θεός, καὶγρηγορεῖ, καὶ ὀργίζεται, καὶ βαδίζει, καὶ θρόνον ἔχει τὰχερουβίμ· καίτοι πότε γέγονεν ἐμπαθής ; πότε δὲ σῶμαθεὸν ἀκήκοας ; τοῦτο οὐκ ὂν ἀνεπλάσθη. ὠνομάσαμενγάρ, ὡς ἡμῖν ἐφικτόν, ἐκ τῶν ἡμετέρων τὰ τοῦ θεοῦ. τὸμὲν ἠρεμεῖν αὐτὸν ἀφ’ ἡμῶν, καὶ οἷον ἀμελεῖν, δι’ ἃς αὐτὸςοἶδεν αἰτίας, ὑπνοῦν. τὸ γὰρ ἡμέτερον ὑπνοῦν τοιοῦτον,ἀνενέργητόν τε καὶ ἄπρακτον. τὸ δὲ ἀθρόως εὖ ποιεῖν ἐκμεταβολῆς, γρηγορεῖν. ὕπνου γὰρ λύσις ἐγρήγορσις,ὥσπερ ἀποστροφῆς ἐπίσκεψις. τὸ δὲ κολάζειν ὀργίζεσθαιπεποιήκαμεν· οὕτω γὰρ ἡμῖν ἐξ ὀργῆς ἡ κόλασις. τὸ δὲνῦν μὲν τῇδε, νῦν δὲ τῇδε ἐνεργεῖν, βαδίζειν. ἡ γὰρ ἀπ’ἄλλου πρὸς ἄλλο μετάβασις, βαδισμός. τὸ δὲ ἐναναπαύεσθαιταῖς ἁγίαις δυνάμεσι, καὶ οἷον ἐμφιλοχωρεῖν,καθέζεσθαι καὶ θρονίζεσθαι. καὶ τοῦτο ἡμέτερον. οὐδενὶγὰρ οὕτως ὡς τοῖς ἁγίοις τὸ θεῖον ἐναναπαύεται. τὸ δὲ22. 9 αὐτὸς αἰτίας οἶδεν c: οἶδεν αὐτὸς αἰτίας e ΙΙ 10 om ὕπνουν secundoloco b || 16 εναναπαυεσθαι] εναπαυεσθαι (sic) c: ἀναπαύεσθαι df ΙΙ 19 εναναπαυεται]ἐπαναπαύεται be2 ‘Or. 1’22. There are four heads underwhich we may arrange the phenomenaof Scripture language, (I)There are things said which are notliterally true. Of this kind are allthe anthropomorphic expressions concerningGod.1. λέγεται δέ] sc. in Scripture.4. ὑπνοῖ] Ps. xliii 24 (xliv 23).5. γρηγορεῖ] Jer. xxxi 28.id. ὀργίζεται] e.g. Ps. lxxviii(lxxix) 5.ib. βαδίζει] The word does notseem to be used of God in LXX.The ref. is doubtless to passageslike Gen. iii 8.ib. θρόνον ἔχει] Ps. lxxix 2 (lxxx 1);Ezek. i 26.6. ἐμπαθής] in ref. to ὑπνοῖ,γρηγορεῖ, ὀργίζεται; σῶμα, to βαδίζει,θρόνον.9. ἠρεμεῖν … ἀφ’ ἠμ’.] ‘lettingalone’ (lit. ‘keeping quiet from us’).11. ἀθρόως] ‘suddenly; cp. ii 2.15. τῇδε. … τῇδε] ‘in this directionand in that.’17. ταῖς ἃγ. δυνάμεσι] sc. τοῖςχερουβίμ. ‘Resting in those holyPowers and, as it were, being fondof the place, is “sitting” and “beingenthroned”.’18. οὐδενὶ γάρ] The γάρ explains,not the καὶ τοῦτο ἠμ’., but the choiceof the expression ‘resting’ etc. Godis in everything; but there is nothingin which He ‘rests’ as He does inthe saints (and angelic beings).19. τὸ δέ ὀξυκ.] more instances ofmetaphorical language. God ‘flies,’Ps. xvii li (xviii 10); we speak ofHis ‘face,’ e.g. Ps. iv 7 (6); His‘hand,’ e.g. Ps. cxliv (cxlv) 16.ὀξυκίνητον, πτῆσιν· τὴν δὲ ἐπισκοπήν, πρόσωπον· τὸδιδόναι δὲ καὶ προσίεσθαι, χεῖρα· καὶ ἄλλη τις ὅλως τῶντοῦ θεοῦ δυνάμεων ἢ ἐνεργειῶν ἄλλο τι τῶν σωματικῶνἡμῖν ἀνεζωγράφησεν.Πάλιν σὺ πόθεν τὸ ἀγέννητον λαβὼν ἔχεις, ἢ τὸἄναρχον, τὰς σὰς ἀκροπόλεις, ἢ καὶ ἡμεῖς τὸ ἀθάνατον ;δεῖξον ταῦτα ὀνομαστί, ἢ διαγράψομεν, καὶ τέθνηκαςἐκ τῶν σῶν ὑποθέσεων, καθαιρεθέντων σοι τῶν ὀνομάτων,καὶ τοῦ τείχους τῆς καταφυγῆς ἐφ’ ᾧ ἐπεποίθεις.23. 6 om η e2 || 7 ὀνομαστὶ] + καὶ η ἀθετήσομεν ἐπειδὴ οὐ γέγραπταιbed, nisi quod om καὶ cd || 9 ἐφ’ ω] ἐφ’ ο ac22. προσίεσθαι] ‘to welcome’;ii 119.ib. ὅλως] ‘in short.’4. ἀνεζωγράφησεν] ‘has depicted,’i.e. ‘has suggested the form of.’should almost have expected theinversion of the sentence, — thatbodily things depict the powers andoperations of God; but either wayis intelligible.23. (2) There are th ings not saidwhich are nevertheless true, — amongthem facts of which you make adeal. (3) Things neither said nortrue. (4) Things both true and said.5. πάλιν] Instances of truethings not found in Scripture.6. τὰς σὰς ἀκροπ.] ‘those fortressesof yours’; cp. below τοῦτῆς καταφυγῆς.7. ἢ διαγράψομεν] Cp. iii 8. Thewords ἢ ἀθετήσομεν, ἐπειδὴ οὐ γέγραπταιseem to be an ancient glossto explain ἢ διαγράψομεν. Theyoffer no real alternative to it ; andthe variation of the mss. which containthem between ἢ and καὶ ἢ indicatesthe uncertainty of their footing.If they are to be retained, the onlysense that can be got out of themwould be this: — Shew us the wordsἀγέννητον, ἄναρχον in the Bible, andwe will either reject the HolyGhost’s Divinity for not being foundthere, or (if we can prove that it isthere) we will erase both it and yourtwo words together. But this wouldbe very cumbrous. Omitting thewords, the sense is plain. Gr. retaliates; — Shew us ἀγένν., ἄναρχ. inthe Bible, or we will discard them,and you will die by your own rules.The perf. τέθνηκας gives vividnessto the argument. Probably thegloss was introduced because Gr. ’sword διαγράψομεν seemed itself toimply that the words ἀγέννητον etc.were to be found written in Scripture.How can that be erased whichwas never written? The scribewished to substitute for διαγρ. themore general word ἀθετήσομεν, ‘becausethe expressions in questionare not written.’ It may bethat the correction might bedue to Gr. himself; but (1) its placein the MSS. is against it; it ought tohave followed διαγρ.; (2) by διαγρ.Gr. intended no reference to beingfound in Scripture ; he meant, ifconscious of the metaphor at all, anerasure from the theological writingsin which the expressions occurred.8. τῶν ὀνομάτων] sc. ἀγέννητον,ἄναρχον.ἢ δῆλον ὅτι ἐκ τῶν ταῦτα συναγόντων, κἂν μὴ ταῦταλέγηται ; τίνων τούτων ; Ἐγώ εἰ μί’ πρῶτος, καὶ ἐγὼ μετὰταῦτα. καί, Πρὸ ἐμοῦ οὐκ ἔστιν ἄλλος θεός, καὶ μετ’ ἐμὲοὐκ ἔσται. ὅλον γὰρ τὸ ἔστιν ἐμόν· οὔτε ἠργμένον, οὔτεπαυσόμενον. ταῦτα λαβών, τὸ μὲν μὴ εἶναί τι πρὸ αὐτοῦ,μηδὲ πρεσβυτέραν αἰτίαν ἔχειν, ἄναρχον προσηγόρευσας,καὶ ἀγέννητον· τὸ δὲ μὴ στήσεσθαι τοῦ εἶναι, ἀθάνατονκαὶ ἀνώλεθρον. αἱ μὲν δὴ πρῶται συζυγίαι τοιαῦται,καὶ οὕτως ἔχουσαι. τίνα δὲ οὔτε ἔστιν, οὔτε λέγεται;πονηρὸν τὸ θεῖον, ἡ σφαῖρα τετράγωνος, τὸ παρελθὸνἐνέστηκεν, οὐ σύνθετον ὁ ἄνθρωπος. τίνα γὰρ εἰς τοσοῦτόνποτε ἐμπληξίας ἀφικόμενον ἔγνως, ὥστε τι τοιοῦτονἢ ἐννοῆσαι τολμῆσαι, ἢ ἀποφήνασθαι ; λείπεται δεῖξαιτίνα καὶ ἔστι καὶ λέγεται· θεός, ἄνθρωπος, ἄγγελος, κρίσις·ματαιότης οἱ τοιοῦτοι συλλογισμοί, καὶ τῆς πίστεως ἀνατροπή,καὶ τοῦ μυστηρίου κένωσις.3 μετ’ ἐμὲ] μετ’ ἐμοῦ a || ΙΙ σύνθετον] σύνθετος b || 12 ἐμπληξίας ποτε df ||15 ματαιότης] ἀνταπόδοσις ‘Reg. Cypr.’1. ἢ δῆλον] The ellipsis is, (Haveyou any other interpretation) or is itevident?ib. ἐκ τῶν τ. σύναγ’.] Supplyἐστίν, or λαμβάνεται : ‘that they arededuced from passages which implythem.’2. ἐγώ εἰμι πρῶτος] Is. xliv 6.3. πρὸ ἐμοῦ] Is. xliii 10.4. ὅλον γὰρ τὸ ἐστιν ἐμόν] Godis represented as still speaking ; ‘allthat is included in the word Is isMine, without beginning and withoutend.’5. ταῦτα λαβών] You have takenthese facts, and have (rightly) deducedfrom them the appellationswhich you give to God, of ἀγέννητον,ἀθάνατον, and the rest.8. αἱ…πρῶται σῦς.] viz. thingsthat are said and are not, and thingsthat are and are not said.10. τὸ παρελθὸν ἔνεστ’.] ‘past ispresent.’12 ἐμπληξίας] ‘so daft.’13. ἀποφήνασθαι] ‘to declare hisopinion that it is so.’ The ἢmean ‘or at any rate.’14. θεός, ἄνθρ., κτλ.] Gr. firstnames four substantives, and thencertain propositions ; ‘such syllo-gisms are vanity, and aof faith, and an emptying of themystery? See 1 Cor. i 17 foll.24. This being so, we must notmake too much of the reticenceScripture. When you hear of twicefive, you are justified in saying ten ;so whatever is clearly implied inScripture may rightly be affirmed,even if it is not explicitly statedthere. I will give you the reason forthe reticence of Scripture.τοσαύτης οὖν οὔσης διαφορᾶς ἐν τοῖς ὀνόμασι καὶτοῖς πράγμασι, πῶς οὕτω σὺ λίαν δουλεύεις τῷ γράμματι,καὶ γίνῃ μετὰ τῆς Ἰουδαικῆς σοφίας, καὶ συλλαβαῖςἀκολουθεῖς, ἀφεὶς τὰ πράγματα ; εἰ δὲ σοῦ τὰ δὶς πέντελέγοντος, ἢ τὰ δὶς ἑπτά, τὰ δέκα συνῆγον, ἢ τέσσαρες καὶδέκα ἐκ τῶν λεγομένων· ἢ ἐκ τοῦ ζῶον λογικόν, θνητόν,τὸν ἄνθρωπον, ἆρα ἄν σοι ληρεῖν ἐνομίσθην ; καὶ πῶς, τὰσὰ λέγων; οὐ γὰρ τοῦ λέγοντος μᾶλλον οἱ λόγοι, ἢ τοῦλέγειν συναναγκάζοντος. ὥσπερ οὖν ἐνταῦθα οὐκ ἂν τὰλεγόμενα μᾶλλον ἐσκόπουν, ἢ τὰ νοούμενα· οὕτως οὐδὲ εἴτι ἄλλο τῶν μὴ λεγομένων, ἢ μὴ σαφῶς, ἐκ τῆς γραφῆςνοούμενον ηὕρισκον, ἔφυγον ἂν τὴν ἐκφώνησιν, φοβούμενοςσὲ τὸν συκοφάντην τῶν ὀνομάτων. οὕτω μὲν οὖν στησόμεθαπρὸς τοὺς ἐξ ἡμισείας εὐγνώμονας. σοὶ γὰρ οὐδὲτοῦτο ἔξεστι λέγειν. ὁ γὰρ τὰς τοῦ υἱοῦ προσηγορίαςοὕτως ἐναργεῖς οὔσας καὶ τοσαύτας ἀρνούμενος, οὐδ’ ἂνταύτας ᾐδέσθης δῆλον ὅτι, καὶ εἰ πολλῷ σαφεστέρας καὶπλείους ἐγίνωσκες. ἤδη δὲ καὶ τὴν αἰτίαν δηλώσω τῆς24. 3 συλλαβαις] ταῖς συλλ. c || 4 ακολουθης f || 5 τεσσαπες] τὰ τεσσαπεσcdf || 10 εἰ] + μὴ ‘Or. I’ || 12 νοουμένων bede.1. ἐν τοῖς ὂν. καἰ τοῖς πρ.] ‘diversityin names and things.’3. τῆς ᾿Ιουδ. σοφίας] because theJews were ‘slaves to the letter.’ib. συλλαβαῖς] Basil, on theother hand, de Sp. S. 1, points outthe extreme importance of noticing‘syllables.8. τὰ σὰ λέγων] ‘for saying whatyou said? For words belong as muchto him who forces them to be said(i.e. in this case to you who gaveme the data for my conclusion) as tohim who said them ’ (i.e. to me whothat you meant ‘ten,’‘man’).9. ἐνταῦθα] in the case just supposed.10. οὐδὲ εἴ τι ἄλλο κτλ.] lif Ifound anything else intended inScripture (lit. found out of Scriptureanything else intended), though notstated, or not stated clearly, I shouldnot have shrunk from expressing itfor fear ’ etc.13. συκοφ. τῶν ὂν.] The worddenotes one who is on the watchfor words to denounce them.ib. στησόμεθα πρός] ‘will takeour stand against.’ The οὕτωto the argument from the beginningof § 21 to this point.14. σοὶ γάρ] i.e. the Eunomian ;oὐδὲ τοῦτο means the foregoingment, which he says would for thembe without force. This seems tohave more point than to suppose itto mean ἐξ ἤμ’. εύγν. εἶναι.17. ταύτας] the προσηγορίαι ofthe Spirit.πάσης ἐπικρύψεψς, καίπερ σοφοῖς οὖσιν ὑμῖν, βραχύ τιτὸν λόγον ἀναγαγών.Δύο γεγόνασι μεταθέσεις βίων ἐπιφανεῖς ἐκ τοῦπαντὸς αἰῶνος, αἳ καὶ δύο διαθῆκαι καλοῦνται, καὶ σεισμοὶγῆς, διὰ τὸ τοῦ πράγματος περιβόητον· ἡ μὲν ἀπὸ τῶνεἰδώλων ἐπὶ τὸν νόμον, ἡ δὲ ἀπὸ τοῦ νόμου πρὸς τὸεὐαγγέλιον. καὶ τρίτον σεισμὸν εὐαγγελιζόμεθα, τὴν ἐντεῦθενἐπὶ τὰ ἐκεῖσε μετάστασιν, τὰ μηκέτι κινούμενα,μηδὲ σαλευόμενα. ταὐτὸν δὲ αἱ δύο διαθῆκαι πεπόνθασι.τί τοῦτο ; οὐκ ἀθρόως μετεκινήθησαν, οὐδὲ ὁμοῦ τῇ πρώτῃκινήσει τῆς ἐγχειρήσεως. τίνος ἕνεκεν ; εἰδέναι γὰρ ἀναγκαῖονἵνα μὴ βιασθῶμεν, ἀλλὰ πεισθῶμεν. τὸ μὲν γὰρἀκούσιον οὐδὲ μόνιμον· ὥσπερ ἃ βίᾳ κατέχεται τῶνῥευμάτων ἢ τῶν φυτῶν· τὸ δὲ ἑκούσιον μονιμώτερόν τεκαὶ ἀσφαλέστερον. καὶ τὸ μὲν τοῦ βιασαμένου, τὸ δὲἡμέτερον· καὶ τὸ μὲν ἐπιεικείας θεοῦ, τὸ δὲ τυραννικῆς25. 9 μηδε] μήτε ag ‘duo Reg.’ || 11 ἕνεκεν] ἕνεκα df1. ἐπικρύψεως] the reticence ofthe Bible on the subject of theSpirit’s Godhead.ib. σοφοῖς] of course ironical,‘although you are so wise as to needno instruction.’2. ἀναγαγών] ‘going some distanceback’; not back over the preargument,but to principlessomewhat remote from the conclusion.25. Two great changes have occurredin the history of religion,when inert passed under the first andsecond Covenants respectively. Inneither case was the change violentlymade. Like a skilled teacher orphysician, God made the new orderagreeable by permitting for a whilesomething from the old, until memwere ready to give it up of themselves.3. μεταθέσεις βίων] He callstwo dispensations by this title, becausehe is about to dwell on thepractical difficulties attending suchtransitions.4. σεισμοὶ γῆς] The ref. is toHeb. xii 26.5. διὰ τὸ...περιβόητον] ‘becauseof the celebrity of the thing,’cause the change was so great andon such a scale as to compelwide attention.7. ἐντεῦθεν ... ἐκεῖσε] from thepresent order to that which is beyond.9. μήδε’ σαλευόμενα] Heb. xii 28.10. ἀθρόως] Cp. § 22.12. τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἅκ. οὐδὲ μόνιμον]‘for what is not voluntary is notlasting either.’15. τὸ μὲν τοῦ βίας.] In the oneinstance, the change would bethe work of him who forced it on ;in the other, it is our own. The onekind of change is in keeping withthe the considerateness of God ; theother would be a mark of tyrannicalpower.ἐξουσίς. οὔκουν ᾤετο δεῖν ἄκοντας εὖ ποιεῖν, ἀλλ’ ἑκόνταςεὐεργετεῖν. διὰ τοῦτο παιδαγωγικῶς τε καὶ ἰατρικῶς τὸμὲν ὑφαιρεῖ τῶν πατρίων, τὸ δὲ συγχωρεῖ, μικρόν τι τῶνπρὸς ἡδονὴν ἐνδιδούς· ὥσπερ οἱ ἰατροὶ τοῖς ἀρρωστοῦσιν,ἵνα ἡ φαρμακεία παραδεχθῇ διὰ τῆς τέχνης φαρματτομένητοῖς χρηστοτέροις. οὐ γὰρ ῥᾴστη τῶν ἐν ἔθει καὶμακρῷ χρόνῳ τετιμημένων ἡ μετάθεσις. λέγω δὲ τί ; ἡπρώτη τὰ εἴδωλα περικόψασα τὰς θυσίας συνεχώρησεν·ἡ δευτέρα τὰς θυσίας περιελοῦσα τὴν περιτομὴν οὐκἐκώλυσεν· εἶτα ὡς ἅπαξ ἐδέξαντο τὴν ὑφαίρεσιν, καὶ τὸσυγχωρηθὲν συνεχώρησαν· οἱ μὲν τὰς θυσίας, οἱ δὲ τὴνπεριτομήν· καὶ γεγόνασιν, ἀντὶ μὲν ἐθνῶν, Ἰουδαῖοι· ἀντὶδὲ τούτων, Χριστιανοί, ταῖς κατὰ μέρος μεταθέσεσι κλαπέντεςἐπὶ τὸ εὐαγγέλιον. πειθέτω σὲ τοῦτο Παῦλος, ἐκτοῦ περιτέμνειν καὶ ἁγνίζεσθαι προελθὼν ἐπὶ τὸ λέγειν·Ἐγὼ δέ, ἀδελφοί, εἰ περιτομὴν κηρύσσω, τί ἔτι διώκομαι ;ἐκεῖνο τῆς οἰκονομίας, τοῦτο τῆς τελειότητος.7 μακρω] τῶν μακρῶ b : τὼ μακρῶ def2. τὸ μὲν ὑφαῖρει] ‘like α school-master or physician, He withdrawssome parts of the hereditary system,and leaves others as α concession,giving in upon some small pointswhich tend to keep men happy.’5. φαρματτ. τοῖς χρηστ.] ‘beingseasoned with something nicer’ thanitself. The rhythm of the sentenceis in favour of joining διὰ τῆς τέχνηςto παραδεχθῇ rather than to φαρμ.6. ῥᾴστη] used as an equivalentto the simple ῥᾳδία.7. μακρῷ χρόνω Cp. ii 14.8. τὰς θυσίας σνεχ.] This, whichis the usual patristic view of the legalsacrifices, is well expressed by Cyr.Al. c. Iul. iv p. 126 (Aubert) ; andby Greg, the Great in his letter toMellitus (Bede Hist. Eccl. i 30).10. ἐδέξαντο τὴν ὑφ.] ‘as soon asthey were reconciled to the with-drawal, they conceded the concessionthat had been made to them.’ It isnot clear at what point Gr. meansthat the Jews ‘conceded’ the sacrifaces.It ought, ace. to the parallelism,to mean when ‘they becameJews instead of heathens,’ asgave up circumcision when they‘became Christians instead of Jews.’This, however, would only beof special representatives of the race,like Samuel and other prophets andpsalmists, who taught that obedi-ence was better than sacrifice. IfGr. is not thinking of these, wemust suppose that the time whenthey gave up the sacrifices waspractically the same as when theygave up circumcision, i.e. not whenthey first became ‘Jews,’ but whenthey became Christians.13. κλαπέντες] For the use ofκλέπτειν cp. i 2.14. ἐκ τοῦ περιτ. καἰ ἅγν’.] Actsxvi 3, xxi 26.16. ἐγὼ δέ, ἀδελφοί] Gal. v. 11.Probably Gr. does not mean that thiswas an advance in St Paul’sviews. He can hardly have failedto know that the Ep. to the Gal.was written before the incident inActs xxi 26. He only meanswe see St Paul sometimes acting onthe principle of οἰκονομία, i.e. departurefrom what is absolutely best,out of consideration for the circumstancesof others, and sometimes onthe principle of τελειότης.τούτῳ τὸ τῆς θεολογίας εἰκάζειν ἔχω, πλὴν ὅσονἐκ τῶν ἐναντίων. ἐκεῖ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ τῶν ὑφαιρέσεων ἡμετάθεσις· ἐνταῦθα δὲ διὰ τῶν προσθηκῶν ἢ τελείωσις.ἔχει γὰρ οὕτως. ἐκήρυσσε φανερῶς ἡ παλαιὰ τὸν πατέρα,τὸν υἱὸν ἀμυδρότερον. ἐφανέρωσεν ἡ καινὴ τὸν υἱόν,ὑπέδειξε τοῦ πνεύματος τὴν θεότητα. ἐμπολιτεύεται νῦντὸ πνεῦμα, σαφεστέραν ἡμῖν παρέχον τὴν ἑαυτοῦ δήλωσιν.οὐ γὰρ ἦν ἀσφαλές, μήπω τῆς τοῦ πατρὸς θεότητος ὁμολογηθείσης,τὸν υἱὸν ἐκδήλως κηρύττεσθαι· μηδὲ τῆς τοῦυἱοῦ παραδεχθείσης, τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον, ἵν εἴπω τι καὶτολμηρότερον, ἐπιφορτίζεσθαι· μὴ καθάπερ τροφῆ τῇ ὑπὲρδύναμιν βαρηθέντες, καὶ ἡλιακῷ φωτὶ σαθροτέραν ἔτιπροσβαλόντες τὴν ὄψιν, καὶ εἰς τὸ κατὰ δύναμιν κινδυνεύσωσι·ταῖς δὲ κατὰ μέρος προσθήκαις, καί, ὡς εἶπε Δαβίδ,ἀναβάσεσι, καὶ ἐκ δόξης εἰς δόξαν προόδοις καὶ προκοπαῖς,26. 13 προσβαλόντες] προσβάλλοντες be : προβαλόντες ‘Or. 1’26. So it was with the doctrineof God, except that the successivechanges have been in the direction ofbelieving more truths, not fewer.When the doctrine of the Father waswell established, that of the Son wasrevealed, and when that was accepted,then the doctrine of theSpirit. The Spirit Himself cameby degrees. Christ Himself revealedHim only by slow advances.1. τῆς τῆς θεολογίας] ‘the doctrine ofGod.’ib. πλὴν ὅσον ἐκ τῶν ἐν.] ‘exceptthat it follows the opposite order.’The change of practical system consistsin dropping things; the doctrinalchange consists in learningadditional truths.6. ἐμπολιτεύεται] ‘is residentand active among us.’ Gr.that the Church learns byexperience how to interpret theslight indications of the Holy Ghost’sDivinity given by the N.T. It doesnot follow that he thought doctrinaladvance possible in other directionsalso.11. ἐπιφορτίζεσθαι] ‘to be piled onthe top of it,’ as an additionalto be carried.ib. καθάπερ τροφῆ κτλ.] Cp.i 3.15. ἀναβάσεσι] Ps. lxxxiii 6(lxxxiv 5). It is prob. that thewords ἐκ δυνάμεως εἰς δύναμιν inν. 8 (7) suggested the ἐκ δόξης εἰςδόξαν which follows (2 Cor. iii 18).ib. προόδοις] Cp. ii 20.τὸ τῆς τριάδος φῶς ἐκλάμψῃ τοῖς λαμπροτέροις. διὰταύτην, οἶμαι, τὴν αἰτίαν καὶ τοῖς μαθηταῖς κατὰ μέροςἐπιδημεῖ, τῆ τῶν δεχομένων δυνάμει παραμετρούμενον, ἐνἀρχῇ τοῦ εὐαγγελίου, μετὰ τὸ πάθος, μετὰ τὴν ἄνοδον, τὰςδυνάμεις ἐπιτελοῦν, ἐμφυσώμενον, ἐν γλώσσαις πυρίναιςφαινόμενον. καὶ ὑπὸ Ἰησοῦ κατ’ ὀλίγον ἐκφαίνεται, ὡςἐπιστήσεις καὶ αὐτὸς ἐντυγχάνων ἐπιμελέστερον· ᾿Ερωτήσω,φησί, τὸν πατέρα, καὶ ἄλλον παράκλητον πέμψει ὑμῖν, τὸπνεῦμα τῆς ἀληθείας· ἵνα μὴ ἀντίθεος εἶναι δόξῃ τις, καὶὡς ἀπ’ ἄλλης τινὸς ἐξουσίας ποιεῖσθαι τοὺς λόγους. εἶτα,Πέμψει μέν, ἐν δὲ τῷ ὀνόματί μου. τὸ ᾿Ερωτήσω παρείς, τὸΠέμψει τετήρηκεν. εἶτα, Πέμψω, τὸ οἰκεῖον ἀξίωμα· εἶτα,Ἥξει, ἡ τοῦ πνεύματος ἐξουσία.Ὁρᾷς φωτισμοὺς κατὰ μέρος ἡμῖν ἐλλάμποντας,1 εκλαμψη] ἐκλάμψει ab : σαφῶς ἐκλάμπειν ‘Reg. Cypr.’ || 3 παραμετρούμενον]μετρούμενον df || 5 ἐμφυσώμενον] εκφ. cd || 6 ιησου] υἱοῦ ‘Coisl. 2 etsex Colb.’: χρίστου ‘Reg. Cypr.’ || 7 επιστηση b 27. 14 ημιν καταμέρος b1. ἐκλάμψῃ τοῖς λ.] On theprinciple that ‘he that hath, to himshall be given.’ The subjunctivemust be explained as depending uponthe ἵνα implied in μή.2. κ. τοῖς μαθηταῖς κ. μ. ἐπ’.]‘why the Spirit sojourns with thedisciples by degrees, dealing Himselfout to them in proportion to the capacityof the recipients.’3. ἐν ἀρχῇ τοῦ εὑ.] The twoseries, of three members each, correspond. ’In the beginning of theGospel,’ He ‘performs miraclesthrough the disciples (Luke ix Ι)‘after the Passion,’ He is ’breathedupon’ the disciples (John χχ 22)‘after after the going up,’ He ‘revealedHimself in fiery tongues’ (Acts ii 3)The same profectus apostolicus istraced in or. xli 11, and by Gr.’ssecretary Jerome ad Hedib.7. ἐντυγχάνων] ‘perusing’; cp.§ 21. The progress in our Lord’sstatements about the Holy Ghost istraced in four sayings.ib. ἐρωτήσω] John xiv 16.9. ἀντίθεος] Cp. iv 5. Jesusmight have seemed to be settingHimself up as a kind of rival God,and to speak as if by some independentauthority, if He had not inthe first instance referred the missionof the Holy Ghost entirely to theFather.10. εἶτα, Πέμψει μέν] John xiv26. Here, though the ‘mission’ isstill referred to the Father, the Son’srequest is dropped, and the Spiritis said to be sent ‘in His name.’12. εἶτα, Πέμψω] John xv 26.Here the Son’s personal dignity isrevealed, as Himself the sender ofthe Spirit. Gr. of course is not directlyrectly speaking of the EternalProcession.ib. εἶτα, Ἥξει] John xvi 7 (ἔλθῃ).Here the Spirit’s own freedombrought out. It is a correct anduseful observation.καὶ τάξιν θεολογίας, ἢν καὶ ἡμᾶς τηρεῖν ἄμεινον, μήτεἀθρόως ἐκφαίνοντας, μήτε εἰς τέλος κρύπτοντας. τὸ μὲνγὰρ ἄτεχνον, τὸ δὲ ἄθεον· καὶ τὸ μὲν τοὺς ἀλλοτρίουςπλῆξαι δυνάμενον, τὸ δὲ ἀλλοτριῶσαι τοὺς ἡμετέρους. ὃδὲ ἴσως μὲν ἤδη τισὶν ἦλθεν ἐπὶ νοῦν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων, ἐγὼδὲ τῆς ἐμαυτοῦ διανοίας ὑπολαμβάνω καρπόν, προσθήσωτοῖς εἰρημένοις. ἦν τινὰ τῷ σωτῆρι, καὶ εἰ πολλῶν ἐνεπίμπλαντομαθημάτων, ἃ μὴ δύνασθαι τότε βασταχθῆναι τοῖςμαθηταῖς ἐλέγετο, δι’ ἃς εἶπον ἴσως αἰτίας, καὶ διὰ τοῦτοπαρεκαλύπτετο· καὶ πάλιν πάντα διδαχθήσεσθαι ἡμᾶςὑπὸ τοῦ πνεύματος ἐνδημήσαντος. τούτων ἓν εἶναι νομίζωκαὶ αὐτὴν τοῦ πνεύματος τὴν θεότητα, τρανουμένην εἰςὕστερον, ὡς τηνικαῦτα ὡρίμου καὶ χωρητῆς ἤδη τυγχανούσηςτῆς γνώσεως, μετὰ τὴν τοῦ σωτῆρος ἀποκατάστασιν,οὐκέτι ἀπιστουμένου τῷ θαύματι. τί γὰρ ἂν τούτου μεῖζονἢ ἐκεῖνος ὑπέσχετο, ἢ τὸ πνεῦμα ἐδίδαξεν ; εἴπερ τι μέγα2 om τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἄτεχνον τὸ ’δε ἄθεον καὶ b || 5 ἦλθε τισιν ἔπι νοῦν ἤδη d :ἦλθεν ἤδη τισιν ἔπι νοῦν f || 6 ἐμαυτοῦ] ἐμῆς b ‘in nonnull.’ || 9 αιτιας]αἰτίαις a || 11 τούτων] τοῦτον a || 12 eis] + τοῖς ‘Reg. Cypr.’ || 15 απιστομενην]απιστομενην ‘Reg. a’ || τούτου] τοῦτο f127. That is still the right method,— not to keep things back, butnot to teach them till people areprepared. Perhaps one of the thingswhich the disciples could not bearwhile Christ was with them, butwere to learn afterwards from theSpirit, was this very doctrine of theSpirit’s Godhead.1. καὶ ἡμᾶς] as well as ourSaviour. τάξιν is ace. after δρᾷς,and ἐκφαίνοντας, κρύπτοντας, agreewith ἡμᾶς, not with φωτισμούς, ‘yousee light shining upon us by degrees,and an order in the revelation ofGod.’2. ἀθρόως] Cp. § 22.3. ἄτεχνον] ‘unworkmanlike.’4. πλῆξαι] to astonish, and sokeep them away from us ; ἀλλότρι’·ὦσαι, because they naturally expectto hear the doctrine taught at theproper time.ib. ὃ δὲ ἴσως μὲν κτλ.] ‘I willadd, what may perhaps have occurredto others also before now, but what Itake to be the result of my independentthought.’8. μὴ δύνασθαι βαστ. ] Johnxvi 12.9. δι’ ἃς εἶπον ἴ’. αἴτ’.] in § 26.10. πάντα διδαχθ.] John xiv 26.12. τρανουμένην] Cp. ii 4. Thepres. part, combines the thought ofthe revelation as then in the futurewith the fact of its subsequent ac-complishment.13. ὡρίμου] Cp. iii I. ‘Theknowledge then being timely andcapable of being received, after ourSaviour’s restoration, when He wasno longer disbelieved in for wonder.’Luke xxiv 41.16. εἴπερ τι μέγα οἴ. χρὴ] ‘if wemay call anything which is promisedor taught great.’ It implies aof appreciation, greater than we perhapspossess, to determine the degreesof greatness in what Godpromises or reveals.οἴεσθαι χρή, καὶ θεοῦ μεγαλοπρεπείας ἄξιον, τὸ ὑπισχνούμενον,ἢ τὸ διδασκόμενον.Ἔχω μὲν οὕτω περὶ τούτων, καὶ ἔχοιμι, καὶ ὅς τιςἐμοὶ φίλος — σέβειν θεὸν τὸν πατέρα, θεὸν τὸν υἱόν, θεὸν τὸπνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον, τρεῖς ἰδιότητας, θεότητα μίαν, δόξῃ, καὶτιμῇ, καὶ οὐσίᾳ, καὶ βασιλείᾳ μὴ μεριζομένην, ὥς τις τῶνμικρῷ πρόσθεν θεοφόρων ἐφιλοσόφησεν· ἢ μὴ ἴδοι ἑωσφόρονἀνατέλλοντα, ὥς φησιν ἡ γραφή, μηδὲ δόξαν τῆς ἐκεῖθενλαμπρότητος, ὅς τις οὐχ οὕτως ἔχει, ἢ συμφέρεται τοῖςκαιροῖς, ἄλλοτε ἄλλος γινόμενος, καὶ περὶ τῶν μεγίστωνσαθρῶς βουλευόμενος. εἰ μὲν γὰρ οὐδὲ προσκυνητόν, πῶςἐμὲ θεοῖ διὰ τοῦ βαπτίσματος ; εἰ δὲ προσκυνητόν, πῶς οὐσεπτόν; εἰ δὲ σεπτόν, πῶς οὐ θεός ; ἓν ἤρτηται τοῦ ἑνός,ἡ χρυσῆ τις ὄντως σειρὰ καὶ σωτήριος. καὶ παρὰ μὲν τοῦ28. 7 μικρῶ πρόσθεν] μικρῶν ἔμπροσθεν b μικρὸν ἔμπροσθεν ‘tresColb.’ || 14 χρυσῆ τις] χρυσῖτις a28. Let this be our position then,to worship in one Godhead threeundivided Persons. Woe to himzoho does not hold it, or who shiftswith the public opinion of the times.If the Holy Ghost gives us the divinenature, He must needs be anobject of worship, and in the fullsense divine.3. ἔχω μὲν οὕτω] ‘That is howI stand’: explained, with noconstruction, by σέβειν.4. θεὸν τὸν πατέρα] ‘the Fatheras God.’ Our familiar ‘GodFather, God the Son,’ is aof expression peculiar to EnglishChristianity.6. τῶν μικρῷ πρ. θεοφόρων] ACC.to Elias, the ref. is to Greg. Thaumaturgus,who, he says, uses thesewords in his ‘Apocalypse.’ Thework is not now extant. Θεοφόρων,‘inspired’ (2 Pet. 121).7. μὴ ἴδοι ἑωσφ. ἀν’. ] Job iii 9.The imprecation must be consideredin the same sense as the anathemasof the Councils.8. ἐκεῖθεν] of heaven.9. συμφ. τοῖς καιροῖς] ‘goes withthe current of the times.’11. σαθρῶς] prob. means (in accordancewith συμφ. τοῖς καιροῖς)‘weakly,’ not ‘corruptly.’ Cp. i 3.The timeserver ‘has but weak resolutionin regard to the things of mostimportance.’12. θεοῖ] ‘make make α God of me’;iii 19.ib. εἰ δὲ προσκ., πῶς οὐ σεπτόν]Evidently Gr. feels σφιν to be ahigher word than the mere externalπροσκ.; it is already implied in οὐδὲπροσκ. in the line above; but thedistinction is not always observed.14. ἢ χρυσῆ τις] in rough appositionto ἐν. It is difficult to decidebetween this reading and χρυσῖτις,which has the authority of the bestMS. The pronuntialion being identical,it seems natural to choose therarer word ; but on the other handthe scribe of ‘a’ may have beenthrown out by the somewhat unusualcombination of ἢ with τις.Cp. ii 19 ἢ αὔρα τις ὀλίγη.πνεύματος ἡμῖν ἡ ἀναγέννησις· παρὰ δὲ τῆς ἀναγεννήσεωςἢ ἀνάπλασις· παρὰ δὲ τῆς ἀναπλάσεως ἡ ἐπίγνωσις τῆςἀξίας τοῦ ἀναπλάσαντος.ταῦτα μὲν οὖν εἴποι τις ἂν τὸ ἄγραφον ὑποθέμενος·ἤδη δὲ ἥξει σοι καὶ ὁ τῶν μαρτυριῶν ἐσμός, ἐξ ὧν,ὅτι καὶ λίαν ἔγγραφος, ἡ τοῦ πνεύματος θεότηςτοῖς μὴ λίαν σκαιοῖς, μηδὲ ἀλλοτρίοις τοῦ πνεύματος.σκόπει δὲ οὕτως· γεννᾶται Χριστός, προτρέχει· βαπτίζεται,μαρτυρεῖ· πειράζεται, ἀνάγει· δυνάμεις ἐπιτελεῖ, συμπαρομαρτεῖ·ἀνέρχεται, διαδέχεται. τί γὰρ οὐ δύναται τῶνμεγάλων, καὶ ὧν θεός ; τί δὲ οὐ προσαγορεύεται ὧν θεός,πλὴν ἀγεννησίας καὶ γεννήσεως ; ἔδει γὰρ τὰς ἰδιότηταςμεῖναι πατρὶ καὶ υἱῷ, ἵνα μὴ σύγχυσις ἦ παρὰ θεότητι,τῆ καὶ τἄλλα εἰς τάξιν ἀγούσῃ καὶ εὐκοσμίαν. ἐγὼ μὲν29. 4 ὑποτιθέμενος ‘Reg. a’ || 13 πάρα] + τῆ df2. ἀνάπλασις] that work of reconstructionof the character, inwhich ἀναγέννησις is the initialmovement. It is only by deepeningexperience of the Spirit’supon ourselves that we becomeconvinced of the greatness of theSpirit Himself.29. Turn to the direct testimonyof Scripture. What things are saidof the Holy Ghost!4. ὑποθέμενος] ‘assuming,’as the basis of discussion’; itdoes not in itself imply ‘admitting.’5. μαρτυριῶν] ‘Scripture testimonies’;cp. § 2.7. μὴ λ. σκαιοῖς] ‘to those whoare not too dense, or altogetherstrangers to the Spirit.’8. γεννᾶται Xp., προτρέχει] Inthe series which follows, the subjectof the first verb of each pair isChrist, the subject of the second isthe Holy Ghost. Προτρέχει, Luke i35, Matt, i 20.9. μαρτυρεῖ] John i 32 foll.ib. ἀνάγει] Matt, iv 1.ib. συμπαρομαρτεῖ] ‘accompaniesHim,’ Luke iv 14 foll., Matt, xiiCp. Or. xli 11 ᾧ παρῆν, οὐχ ὡς 28.ἐνεργοῦν, ἀλλ’ ὡς ὁμοτίμῳσυμπαρομαρτουν.10. διαδέχεται] John xiv 16 etc.ib. τί γὰρ οὐ δύν. κτλ.] ‘Whatmighty thing, peculiar to God, isthere that He cannot do? Whattitle, peculiar to God, is there whichis not applied to Him, except thoseof Unbegotten and Begotten?’ Thephrase ὧν θεός means, ‘which go tomake up our conception of God.’seems strange to add καὶ γεννήσεωςas one of those things ὧν θεός, asthose with whom Gr. is arguingwould not admit it. Gr. means, nodoubt, that to orthodox Christiansthe Godhead cannot be conceivedof without it.12. ἰδιότητας] as in § 28.φρίττω τὸν πλοῦτον ἐννοῶν τῶν κλήσεων, καὶ καθ’ ὅσωνὀνομάτων ἀναισχυντοῦσιν οἱ τῷ πνεύματι ἀντιπίπτοντες.πνεῦμα θεοῦ λέγεται, πνεῦμα χριστοῦ, νοῦς Χριστοῦ,πνεῦμα κυρίου, αὐτὸ κύριος· πνεῦμα υἱοθεσίας,ἐλευθερίας· πνεῦμα σοφίας, συνέσεως, βουλῆς, ἰσχύος,γνώσεως, εὐσεβείας, φοβοῦ θεοῦ· καὶ γὰρ ποιητικὸν τούτωνἁπάντων· πάντα τῇ οὐσίᾳ πληροῦν, πάντα συνέχον αυνέχον· πληρωτικὸνκόσμου κατὰ τὴν οὐσίαν, ἀχώρητον κόσμῳ κατὰτὴν δύναμιν· ἀγαθόν, εὐθές, ἡγεμονικόν, φύσει οὐ θέσει·ἁγιάζον, οὐχ ἁγιαζόμενον, μετροῦν, οὐ μετρούμενον, μετεχόμενον,οὐ μετέχον, πληροῦν, οὐ πληρούμενον, συνέχον, οὐσυνεχόμενον συνεχόμενον· κληρονομούμενον, δοξαζόμενον, συναριθμούμενον,ἐπαπειλούμενον· δάκτυλος θεοῦ, πῦρ ὡς θεός, εἰς1 ὅσων] ὅσον e21. καθ’ ὅσων ὂν. ἀναισχ.] ‘andhow many names they outrage,’‘against how many names they areimpudent.’3. πνεῦμα θεοῦ] e.g. 1 Cor. ii 11 ;Χριστοῦ, Rom. viii 9 ; νοῦς Χρ.,1 Cor. ii 16; πν. κυρίου, 2 Cor. iii17; αὐτὸ κ., ibid.4. πν. υἱοθεσίας] Rom. viii 15ἀληθείας, John xiv 17, xv 26, xvi 13,1 John iv 6; ἐλευθερίας (by implication),2 Cor. iii 17.5. πν. σοφίας κτλ.] Is. xi 2foll.7. πάντα τῇ οὖσ’. πλ.] Wisd. i 7.Πληρωτικὸν κόσμου κ. τ. οὖσ’. isscarcely more than a repetition, butis introduced as an antithesis toἀχώρητον κτλ., which is Gr.’sof the συνέχον τὰ πάνταof Wisdom.9. ἀγαθόν] Doubtless Gr.’sin Ps. cxlii (cxliii) 10 ; εὐθές,Ps. 1 12 (li 10); ἡγεμ., ibid. 14(12).ib. φύσει οὐ θέσει] These wordsqualify the preceding adjectives,and esp. ἡγεμ. The Holy Spirit is‘good, right, sovereigh,’ byand not by an act that involved achange in Him. Θέσις seems to beused in the sense of ‘agreement,’‘arrangement,’ in which sense itis contrasted with φύσις by otherwriters. From this general senseof ‘agreement,’ it comes to be usedof ‘adoption’ into a family, or‘admission’ to the citizenship of acity.10. ἁγιάζον] e.g. Rom. xv 16μετροῦν, ι Cor. xii 1 1 (for οὐ μετρούμενονcp. iv 12); μετεχόμενον, e.g.Phil, ii 1 ; πληροῦν, συνέχον, Wisd.i 7.12. κληρονομούμενον] not a scripturalphrase, but perh. derived frommore general expressions, like 1 Pet.iii 9 εὐλογίαν κλ., or Gal. iii 14 comparedwith 18; or from the usuallanguage of Scripture about ‘habing,’‘receiving,’ the Spirit. Δοξαζόμενον,perh. ι Pet. iv 14; συναριθμ., e.g.Matt, xxviii 19, 2 Cor. xiii 14 ; ἐπαπειλούμενον,‘used as a threat,’ Matt.xii 31 (cp. 2 Thess. ii 8).13. δάκτυλος θ.] Luke xi 20 comparedwith Matt, xii 28 ; πῦρ, Actsii 3 (cp. 1 Thess. v 19, 2 Tim. i 6);ὡς θεός, Hob. xii 29.ἔμφασιν, οἴμαι, τοῦ ὁμοουσίου· πνεῦμα τὸ ποιῆσαν, τὸἀνακτίζον διὰ βαπτίσματος, δι’ ἀναστάσεως· πνεῦμα τὸγινῶσκον ἅπαντα, τὸ διδάσκον, τὸ πνέον ὅπου θέλει καὶὅσον, ὁδηγοῦν, λαλοῦν, ἀποστέλλον, ἀφορίζον, παροξυνόμενον,πειραζόμενον· ἀποκαλυπτικόν, φωτιστικόν, ζωτικόν,μᾶλλον δὲ αὐτοφῶς καὶ ζωή· ναοποιοῦν, θεοποιοῦν, τελειοῦν,ὥστε καὶ προλαμβάνειν τὸ βάπτισμα, καὶ ἐπιζητεῖσθαι μετὰτὸ βάπτισμα· ἐνεργοῦν ὅσα θεός, μεριζόμενον ἐν γλώσσαιςπυρίναις, διαιροῦν χαρίσματα, ποιοῦν ἀποστόλους, προφήτας,εὐαγγελιστάς, ποιμένας, καὶ διδασκάλους· νοερόν,πολυμερές, σαφές, τρανόν, ἀκώλυτον, ἀμόλυντον· ᾧπερ ἴσονδύναται τὸ σοφώτατον καὶ πολύτροπον ταῖς ἐνεργείαις,4 πειραζόμενον παροξυνόμενον e2 || 11 ἀμόλυντον ἀκώλυτον df || ωπερ]ὅπερ abceg ‘plures Reg. etc.’ || 12 το] τὼ acg ‘duo Reg.’1. τὸ ποιῆσαν] Prob. a ref. toGen. i 2 ; ἄνακτ’. διὰ β., John iii 5(2 Cor. v 17); δι’ ἀναστ., Rom. viii11.2. τὸ γινῶσκον ἅπ.] i Cor. ii 10(cp. Ps. exxxviii (exxxix) 7); διδάσκον,John xiv 26, 1 John ii 27πνέον, John iii 8 ; ὁδηγοῦν, John xvi13; λαλοῦν, ἀποστ., ἀφορ., Acts xiii2 foil. (cp. Acts xx 23, 1 Tim. iv 1 ;Is. xlviii 16).4. παροξυνόμενον] Is. lxiii 10 ;πειραζ., Acts v 9.5."/> ἀποκαλυπτικόν] I Cor. ii 10φωτιστ., ζωτ., perh. Ps. xxxv 10(xxxvi 9) as in § 3 (cp. John vi 63Rom. viii 10).6. ναοποιοῦν] I Cor. iii 16, vi 19θεοποιοῦν, constructively deducedfrom the Sourut’s action in baptism ;τελειοῦν, in the ‘mystical’ sense of‘initiating.’ All three words haveref. to ‘baptism,’ in the larger senseof the word ; and the ὥστε prob.belongs to all three. It is moredifficult to say what Gr. means bythis use of ὥστε. Prob. it is intendedto shew that the Spirit’spart in baptism is an active, andnot a passive part, so as to justifyGr.’s attribution to Him ofwork of ‘making’ us temples etc.His independence with respect tothe sacrament is a proof of this.He is able to ‘anticipate baptism’(Acts x 44) ; and ‘baptism’ may bereceived and His indwelling be yetto seek (Acts viii 16).8. ἐνεργοῦν] 1 Cor. xii 11; μερὶ.ζόμενον, Acts ii 3 ; διαιροῦν, I Cor.xii n; ποιοῦν ἀπ’. κτλ., Eph. iv 11compared with 1 Cor. xii 4 foll.,Rom. xii 6, Acts xx 28.10. νοερὸν κτλ.] The followinglist is taken from Wisd. vii 22 foll.,which describes the ‘spirit’ which‘is in Wisdom.’ Gr. does notall the epithets there used, some ofwhich, esp. μονογενές, would havebeen troublesome for him to expound.Each epithet from νοερὸνto ἀμόλυντον is explained. Νοερόν= σοφώτατον ; πολυμερές =ταῖς ἐνεργ. ; σαφές = σαφηνιστικὸνπάντων (neut.) ; τρανόν = τρανωτικόν ;ἀκώλυτον = αὐτεξούσιον (this shewsthe order of df to be wrong) ;ἀμόλυντον = ἀναλλοίωτον (sincechange in the Holy Ghost must be achange for the worse).καὶ σαφηνιστικὸν πάντων, καὶ τρανωτικόν, καὶ αὐτεξούσιονκαὶ ἀναλλοίωτον· παντοδύναμον, παντεπίσκοπον, διὰπάντων χωροῦν πνευμάτων νοερῶν, καθαρῶν, λεπτοτάτων,ἀγγελικῶν, οἶμαι, δυνάμεων, ὥσπερ καὶ προφητικῶν καὶἀποστολικῶν, κατὰ ταὐτό, καὶ οὐκ ἐν τοῖς αὐτοῖς τόποις,ἄλλων δὲ ἀλλαχοῦ νενεμημένων, ᾧ δηλοῦται τὸἀπερίγραπτον.Οἱ ταῦτα λέγοντες καὶ διδάσκοντες, καὶ πρόςἄλλον παράκλητον, οἷον ἄλλον θεόν, ὀνομάζοντες, οἱ τὴνεἰς αὐτὸ βλασφημίαν μόνην εἰδότες ἀσυγχώρητον, οἱ τὸνἈνανίαν καὶ τὴν Σάπφειραν οὕτω φοβερῶς στηλιτεύσαντες,ἐπειδὴ ἐψεύσαντο τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ ἅγιον, ὡς θεὸν ψευσαμένους,οὐκ ἄνθρωπον· οὗτοι τί σοι δοκοῦσι, πότερον θεὸν τὸπνεῦμα κηρύσσειν, ἢ ἄλλο τι; ὡς λίαν ὄντως παχύς τιςεἰ, καὶ πόρρω τοῦ πνεύματος, εἰ τοῦτο ἀπορεῖς, καὶ δέῃ τοῦδιδάξοντος. αἱ μὲν οὖν κλήσεις τοσαῦται καὶ οὕτως5 ταὐτὸ] ταὐτὸν cdef: τοῦτο ‘Or. Ι’ 30. 8 πρὸς γε] προσέτι γε b:προσέτι ‘Reg. a’ || 10 αὐτὸ] αὐτὸν def || 14 κηρύσσειν] κηρύττουσι b ‘Reg. a’ ||16 διδαξοντος] δικάζοντος ‘Reg. Cypr.’2. παντοδύναμον ... λεπτοτάτων]Wisd. vii 23. The ‘understanding,pure, and most subtle spirits’ inWisd. ‘through’ which the Spirit‘goes,’ are, in Gr.’s opinion (nodoubt correct), not only ‘the angelicPowers,’ but also the spirits of prophetsand apostles. These the HolySpirit penetrates κατὰ ταὐτό, ‘simultabeously,’although they are distributedin many different places, whichis a proof that He is infinite.30. Such sayings involve HisGodhead. All language of α differentkind is explained by the principleof referring all to the Father as theFirst Cause.8. οἱ ταῦτα λέγοντες] viz. thesacred writers who used such Ianguageabout the Holy Spirit.ib. πρός γε] adv. ‘besides.’9. οἶον ἄλλον θ.] The words havea dangerous sound; ‘as it wereanother God.’ But Gr. does notmean to call Him so. Hemeans that to call Him a Paracleteat all, in the same sense asis equivalent to calling Him God.10. μόνην εἰδότες ἀσυγχ] Matt.xii 31 foll.11. στηλιτεύσαντες] The Greekmethod of proclaiming somethingto the honour or infamy of a personwas to ‘post’ it on a στήλη or postin some publc place. Hence a personsubjected to such infamy isdescribed in class. Greek as στηλίτῆς;from whence comes theστηλιτεύειν.12. ἐψεύσ…ὡς θεόν] Acts v 3 foll.14. ὡς λίαν] ‘since you reallyare a very stupid person.15. πόρρω τοῦ πν] like ἀλλότριοιτοῦ πν. in § 29, ‘unspiritual.’ἔμψυχοι. τί γὰρ δεῖ σοι τὰς ἐπὶ τῶν ῥημάτων μαρτυρίαςπαρατίθεσθαι; ὅσα δὲ κἀνταῦθα λέγεται ταπεινότερον,τὸ δίδοσθαι, τὸ ἀποστέλλεσθαι, τὸ μερίζεσθαι, τὸ χάρισμα,τὸ δώρημα, τὸ ἐμφύσημα, ἡ ἐπαγγελία, ἡ ὑπερέντευξις, εἴτετι ἄλλο τοιοῦτον, ἵνα μὴ καθ’ ἕκαστον λέγω, ἐπὶ τὴνπρώτην αἰτίαν ἀνενεκτέον, ἵνα τὸ ἐξ οὗ δειχθῇ, καὶ μὴτρεῖς ἀρχαὶ μεμερισμέναι πολυθέως παραδεχθῶσιν. ἴσονγὰρ εἰς ἀσέβειαν, καὶ Σαβελλίως συνάψαι, καὶ Ἀρειανῶςδιαστῆσαι, τὸ μὲν τῷ προσώπῳ, τὸ δὲ ταῖς φύσεσιν.῾Ως ἔγωγε πολλὰ διασκεψάμενος πρὸς ἐμαυτὸντῇ φιλοπραγμοσύνῃ τοῦ νοῦ, καὶ πανταχόθεν τὸν λόγονεὐθύνας, καὶ ζητῶν εἰκόνα τινὰ τοῦ τοσούτου πράγματος,οὐκ ἔσχον ᾧ τινὶ χρὴ τῶν κάτω τὴν θείαν φύσιν παραβαλεῖν.κἂν γὰρ μικρά τις ὁμοίωσις εὑρεθῇ, φεύγει τὸπλεῖον, ἀφέν με κάτω μετὰ τοῦ ὑποδείγματος. ὀφθαλμόν1 ἔπι] ἐκ ‘Reg. Cypr.’ || 5 μὴ] + τα be2 || 7 παραδειχθωσιν ‘Reg. Cypr.’ ||9 τὸ μεν...το ’δε] τὼ μεν...τω ’δε ‘tres Colb.’ 31. 10 om πρὸς εμαιυτον‘Reg. a’ || 12 om του d || 13 παραβαλεῖν] παραλαβεῖν b || 14 om γὰρ b ||φεύγει] + με cdfg || 15 πλεῖον] πλέον cde2f || om με df1. ἔμψυχοι] ‘vivid,’ ‘striking.’ib. τὰς ἐπὶ τῶν ῥ. μ.] ‘the texts inso many words.’ In § 29 theyfor the most part only given allusively.What Gr. means by ἐπὶ τῶνῥ may be seen in iii 17.2. ὅσα δὲ κἀνταῦθα] i.e. as wellas in the case of the Son. See iii 18.3. δίδοσθαι] e.g. Luke xi 13ἀποστ., Luke xxiv 49, Gal. iv 6μερίς., Heb. ii 4; χάρισμα, 2 Tim. i6; δώρημα (δωρεά), John iv 10, Actsviii 20; ἐμφύς., John xx 22; ἐπαγγ.Luke xxiv 49, Acts i 4 ; ὑπερέντευξις(cp. iv 14), Rom. viii 26.6. ἀνενεκτέον] from ἀναφέρω,‘must be referred to the primalCause, in order that it may be shewnfrom whom He proceeds.’7. παραδεχθῶσιν] the correlativeto παραδίδοσθαι ; ‘that men mightnot receive the polytheistic doctrineof three separate Sources, or FirstPrinciples.’9. τὸ μὲν τῷ προσώπῳ] lit. ‘itcounts for the same in impiety,whether you join like Sabellius, ordisjoin like the Arians, — the formerin the person, the latter in the natures.’Gr. seems instinctively tosay τῷ προσώπῳ, not τοῖς προσώποις,because Sabellianism reduces thepersons to one, — if indeed any personalitycan be said to remain.31. Illustrations of the doctrineof the Trinity are wholly inadequate ;like mouth, spring, and stream.10. ὡς ἔγ. π.] ‘How many things!’11. πανταχόθεν] Cp. πολυπρ. ii 9.ib. πανταχόθεν] where the Englishmode of thought would haveexpected πανταχόσε.13. ᾦ τινὶ χρὴ τῶν κ.] ‘to whatearthly thing I might compare.’14. τὸ πλεῖον] ‘the the most improtantpart escapes me, leaving me belowwith my illustration.’15. ὀφθαλμόν] The context makesit unquestionable that Elias is rightin interpreting the word to meanwhat is called ὀπή in James iii 11, —the ‘mouth’ out of which the springissues. No other example of thisusage seems to be known; but Gr.’sown language in his poem aboutthe Holy Ghost (iii 60) leaves noroom for doubt. He there rejectsthe same comparison of πόρος, πηγή,ποταμὸς μέγας, ἐν τε ῥέεθρον. It isjust possible that Gr. was awarethat an ‘eye’ is the ordinary wordin Hebrew for a spring; but in anycase the metaphor is so natural thatit is prob. an accident that we donot find it oftener.τινα, καὶ πηγήν, καὶ ποταμὸν ἐνενόησα, καὶ γὰρ καὶ ἄλλοι,μὴ τῷ μὲν ὁ πατήρ, τῇ δὲ ὁ υἱός, τῷ δὲ τὸ πνεῦμα τὸἅγιον ἀναλόγως ἔχη. ταῦτα γὰρ οὔτε χρόνῳ διέστηκεν,οὔτε ἀλλήλων ἀπέρρηκται τῇ συνεχείᾳ· κἂν δοκεῖ πὼςτρισὶν ἰδιότησι τέμνεσθαι. ἀλλ’ ἔδεισα, πρῶτον μὲν ῥύσιντινὰ θεότητος παραδέξασθαι στάσιν οὐκ ἔχουσαν· δεύτερονδὲ μὴ τὸ ἓν τῷ ἀριθμῷ διὰ τῆς εἰκασίας ταύτης εἰσάγηται.ὀφθαλμὸς γάρ, καὶ πηγή, καὶ ποταμὸς ἕν ἐστιν ἀριθμῷ,διαφόρως σχηματιζόμενα.Πάλιν ἥλιον ἐνεθυμήθην, καὶ ἀκτῖνα, καὶ φῶς.ἁλλὰ κἀνταῦθα δέος, πρῶτον μὲν μὴ σύνθεσίς τις ἐπινοῆταιτῆς ἀσυνθέτου φύσεως, ὥσπερ ἡλίου καὶ τῶν ἐν ἡλίῳ·1 καὶ αλλοι] om καὶ d1 ‘Or. Ι’ || 2 τῆ ’δε] τὼ ’δε de || 3 ἄη] ἔχει b‘Reg. a et b’ || 4 κὰν] καὶ g || δοκει] δοκὴ b ‘Reg. a’ || 5 τρισὶν] τισιν g ||8 ἀριθμῶ] τὼ ἀριθμῶ e2 32. 10 παλιν] η πάλιν ‘tres Reg.’1. καἰ γὰρ καἰ ἄλλοι] Elias suggeststhe Clementine passage whichis given by Cotelierp. 528 (ed. 1672).Cp. Tert. adv. Prax. 8.2. μὴ τῷ μέν] ‘to to see whether.’3. ταῦτα γὰρ κτλ.] The mouth,the spring, and the stream are notdivided by time, nor is their continuitywith each other severed;and yet the three have eacli theirspecial characteristics.5. ῥύσιν] ‘an incessant waste, ordissipation, of Godhead.’as in § 30.8. ἐν ἐστιν ἀριθμῶ They are notreally three distinct things, Gr.thinks ; they are only various formsor phases of the same thing, andtherefore they are inadequate toexpress the Trinity, which is essentiallythree in number.32. So with sun, ray, and light ;or with the flickering sunshine reflectedfrom water upon a wall.10. ἤλιον κτλ] Cp. Tert. adv.Prax. 8.11. κἀνταῦθα δέος] This illustrationlikewise had its dangers. Itmight have suggested that theTrinity is a Trinity by some kind ofcomposition or combination, suchas the science of Gr.’s timebetween the su itself and the rayand the light which were ‘in’ thesun. Cp. Or. xliv 4. And secondlythere was the opposite danger ofsuggesting that the Father alone hastrue positive being, while the Sonand Spirit are but faculties of His,without personal subsistence, suchbeing in Gr.’s view the characterthe ray and the light.δεύτερον δὲ μὴ τὸν πατέρα μὲν οὐσιώσωμεν, τἄλλα δὲ μὴὑποστήσωμεν, ἀλλὰ δυνάμεις θεοῦ ποιήσωμεν ἐνυπαρχούσας,οὐχ ὑφεστώσας, — οὔτε γὰρ ἀκτίς, οὔτε φῶς, ἄλλοςἥλιος, ἀλλ’ ἡλιακαί τινες ἀπόρροιαι, καὶ ποιότητες οὐσιώδεις— καὶ ἅμα τὸ εἶναι καὶ τὸ μὴ εἶναι τῷ θεῷ δῶμεν ἐντούτοις, ὅσον ἐκ τοῦ ὑποδείγματος, ὃ καὶ τῶν εἰρημένωνἀτοπώτερον. ἤκουσα δέ τινος καὶ τοιοῦτον ὑπογράφοντοςλόγον, — μαρμαρυγήν τινα ἡλιακὴν τοίχῳ προσαστράπτουσαν,καὶ περιτρέμουσαν ἐξ ὑδάτων κινήσεως, ἢν ἡ ἀκτὶς5 θέω] + μόνω τὼ πατρὶ ‘Reg. a’: + μόνω ‘duo Coisl.’ || 6 ειρημενων]προειρημένων ‘duo Coisl.’ || 9 η ἀκτὶς] om η cd1f2. ἐνυπαρχούσας] Existing onlyin Him, as attributes of His. Theword is freq. in this sense inAristtle.3. ἄλλος ἥλιος] This, ace. to Gr.,would be necessary to make theillustration complete. Cp. § 14, and§ 30 ἄλλον θεόν. The ray is not theequal of the luminous body whichgives it off; whereas in the Trinitythere is, as it were, a sun giving offa sun.4. ἡλιακαί τ. ἀπόρρ.] ‘solareffluences’; Gr. will not evenἡλίου ἀπόρρ., because it might suggestthat, once flowing forth, theeffluence has some kind of independentexistence, whereas his pointis that the ray and the light are butproperties of the sun. This is furtherbrought out by the additionκαὶ ποιότ. οὖσ’. ‘and essential qualities.’By οὐσιώδεις Gr. seems fromthe context to mean ’belonging to thenature of the sun.’ Elsewhere,the word is used in a way thatwould give an almost oppositemeaning ; e.g. Or. xli 11 οὐκέτι ἐνεργείᾳπαρὸν ὡς πρότερον, οὐσιωδῶς δέ,ὡς ἂν εἴποι τις, συγγινόμενον ; Cyr.Hier. Cat. Myst. iii 1 πνεύματοςἁγίου οὐσιώδης ἐπιφοίτησις. Ace. tothese examples, ποιότητες οὐσιώδειςwould rather mean ‘real, substantivequalities.’ In order to suitcontext, we should then have tounderstand οὐσιώδεις to have somethingof a concessive force, ‘qualitiesafter all, however real andsubstantive.’5. καὶ ἄμα τὸ εἶναι κτλ.] Thegloss μόνῳ τῷ πατρί gives the rightdirection for understanding the passage:it means that if we are contentwith the illustration, we attribute τὸεἶναι only to the Father, and withholdit from the Son and Spirit.Ἐν τούτοις = in the Persons so conceivedof. Thus to ‘God’ (in thesense of ὅλος θεός iv 6) we should‘attribute at the same time existenceand non-existence.’7. ἤκουσα δέ τινος] ‘I once hearda man offering the followingIt is unknown who theman was.8. μαρμαρυγήν τινα] The illustration,tration, though attractive to thepoetical imagination of Gr., is notimmediately clear. It seems at firstas if the trinity were the sunbeam,the water, and the wall, whichcombine to produce the παλμός, thedancing and quivering reflexion.The point, however, appears to lierather in the junction of unity withmultiplicity (the number three beingfor the moment lost sight of) displayedin the vibrations of thesunbeam.ὑπολαβοῦσα διὰ τοῦ ἐν μέσῳ ἀέρος, εἶτα σχεθεῖσα τῷἀντιτύπῳ, παλμὸς ἐγένετο καὶ παράδοξος. ἄττει γὰρπολλαῖς καὶ πυκναῖς ταῖς κινήσεσιν, οὐχ ἓν οὖσα μᾶλλονἢ πολλά, οὐδὲ πολλὰ μᾶλλον ἢ ἕν, τῷ τάχει τῆς συνόδουκαὶ τῆς διαστάσεως, πρὶν ὄψει κρατηθῆναι, διαδιδράσκουσα.Ἀλλ’ οὐδὲ τοῦτο θέσθαι δυνατὸν ἐμοί, δι’ ἓν μέν,ὅτι τὴν μὲν τὸ κινῆσαν καὶ πάνυ δῆλον· θεοῦ δὲ οὐδὲνπρεσβύτερον, ἵν ᾖ τι τὸ τοῦτον κεκινηκός. αὐτὸς μὲν γὰρπάντων αἰτία, αἰτίαν δὲ πρεσβυτέραν οὐκ ἔχει. δεύτερονδέ, ὅτι κἀνταῦθα τῶν αὐτῶν ὑπόνοια, συνθέσεως, χύσεως,ἀστάτου καὶ οὐ παγίας φύσεως, ὧν οὐδὲν ἐννοητέον περὶθεότητος. καὶ ὅλως οὐδὲν ἔστιν ὅ μοι τὴν διάνοιαν ἵστησινἐπὶ τῶν ὑποδειγμάτων θεωροῦντι τὸ φανταζόμενον, πλὴν1 σχεθεισα] χεθεισα ῾El.’ 33. 6 τουτο] τουτω ag ‘tres Colb.’ ||11 ἐννοητέον] cetera desunt in a1. ὑπολαβοῦσα] ῾assuming,’῾catching.’ib. διὰ τοῦ ἐν μ. ἀέρος] ῾by meansof the intervening air.’ Ace.Gr.’s theory, it is the airthe water and the wall which communicatesto the sunbeam the motionof the water. Cp. ii 12, 13,22.ib. σχεθεῖσσ τῷ ἀντ’.] ῾arrested bythe resisting substance.’ Cp. ii 26ἀντιτυπούμεναι.2. παλμὸς ἐγ. καἰ παράδ.] ῾becomes(gnom. aor.) α quivering thatquite surprises you.’ib. ἄττει] = ἀίσσει, ῾vibrates.’33. It is α misleading comparison.We do best to content ourselveswith the few words given usby revelation for our guidance, andso to press on through life, endeavouringto bring all to join in worshippingFather, Son, and HolyGhost, in one Godhead.6. θέσθαι] ῾to lay down as myown.’7. τὴν μὲν τὸ κ.] ῾it is veryclear what moves the sumbeam.’contrasted phrase would strictlyhave run θεὸν δὲ οὐδὲν κινεῖ οὐδόνἐστι τὸ κινοῦν).10. τῶν αὐτῶν ὑπ’.] ῾there is asuspicion (or perh. a notion) of thesame things.’ things’ as in the caseformer illustrations.ib. χύσεως] might seem to be infavour of Elias’ readingabove. But the point of the illustrationthere does not lie in thatword, whether χεθ. be read, orσχέθ’. Χύσις represents the ῾shedding,’whether of light or of water,which implies dissipation.11. ἀστάτου] repeats the στάσινοὐκ ἔχουσαν of § 31. Cp. Poem.iii 64 οὔτε τις ἐξ ὑδάτων κινήμασινἡλιακοῖσι μαρμαρυγή, τοίχοισι περίτρομος,ἀστατέουσα, πρὶν πελάσαιφεύγουσα, πάρος φυγέειν πελάουσα.οὐδὲ γὰρ ἄστατός ἐστι θεοῦ φύσις, ἠὲμούσα ἠὲ πάλιν συνιοῦσα· τὸ δ’ἐμπεδόν ἐστι θεοῖο.12. τὴν διάνοιαν ἵστησιν] ῾nothingto satisfy my mind (lit. which bringsit to a stop) when I contemplateillustrations the image which Iform.’εἴ τις ἕν τι λαβὼν τῆς εἰκόνος, ὑπ’ εὐγνωμοσύνης τὰ λοιπὰῥίψειε. τέλος οὖν ἔδοξέ μοι κράτιστον εἶναι τὰς μὲνεἰκόνας χαίρειν ἐᾶσαι καὶ τὰς σκιάς, ὡς ἀπατηλὰς καὶτῆς ἀληθείας πλεῖστον ἀποδεούσας, αὐτὸν δὲ τῆς εὐσεβεστέραςἐννοίας ἐχόμενον, ἐπ’ ὀλίγων ῥημάτων ἱστάμενον,ὁδηγῷ τῷ πνεύματι χρώμενον, ἢν ἐντεῦθεν ἔλλαμψινἐδεξάμην, ταύτην εἰς τέλος διαφυλάσσοντα, ὡς γνησίανκοινωνὸν καὶ συνόμιλον, τὸν αἰῶνα τοῦτον διαπορεύεσθαιδιατέμνοντα, καὶ τοὺς ἄλλους πείθειν εἰς δύναμιν προσκυνεῖνπατέρα, καὶ υἱόν, καὶ πνεῦμα ἅγιον, τὴν μίανθεότητά τε καὶ δύναμιν· ὅτι αὐτῷ πᾶσα δόξα, τιμή, κράτος,εἰς τοὺς αἰῶνας τῶν αἰώνων· Ἀμήν.8 διαπορεύεσθαι] διαπορθμεύεσθαι e || 9 om διατέμνοντα ῾tres Colb.’ : τεμνονταd1 (ut videtur) || 11 καὶ] + βασίλειαν καὶ ῾Reg. a’ || 12 om αἰώνων ce1. ὑπ’ εὐγνωμοσύνης] The rhythmis in favour of joining these wordsto those which follow ; ῾have thegood sense to throw the rest away.’For the use of the prep. cp. iv 7.4. τῆς ἅλ’. πλ. ἀποδεούσας] ῾quiteinadequate to express the truth.’ib. τῆς ἐύς. ἐνν. ἐχόμενον] ῾clingingto the most reverent of views.’Cp. iv 15 sub fin.5. ἐπ’ ὀλίγων ῥ’. ἴστ’.] ῾satisfiedwith a few (not with few) words.The clause is contrasted with ἵστησινἐπὶ τῶν ὑποδειγμάτων θ. above. ῾Afew words’ of Scripture are all thatwe have to go upon.6. ἐντεῦθεν] = ἀπὸ τοῦ πνεύματος.8. διαπ. διατέμνοντα] ῾to journeythrough this world, cleaving my wayas I go? There is a ref. to theusual expression τέμνειν ὁδόν. Gr.alludes to the difficulties that beseta faith which will not acquiesce inpoor substitutes for knowledge.